1. Physiol Rev. 2004 Apr;84(2):361-84. doi: 10.1152/physrev.00024.2003.

Role of tau protein in both physiological and pathological conditions.

Avila J(1), Lucas JJ, Perez M, Hernandez F.

Author information:
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular "Severo Ochoa", Facultad de Ciencias, Campus de 
Cantoblanco, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, 28049 Madrid, Spain. 
javila@cbm.uam.es

The morphology of a neuron is determined by its cytoskeletal scaffolding. Thus 
proteins that associate with the principal cytoskeletal components such as the 
microtubules have a strong influence on both the morphology and physiology of 
neurons. Tau is a microtubule-associated protein that stabilizes neuronal 
microtubules under normal physiological conditions. However, in certain 
pathological situations, tau protein may undergo modifications, mainly through 
phosphorylation, that can result in the generation of aberrant aggregates that 
are toxic to neurons. This process occurs in a number of neurological disorders 
collectively known as tauopathies, the most commonly recognized of which is 
Alzheimer's disease. The purpose of this review is to define the role of tau 
protein under normal physiological conditions and to highlight the role of the 
protein in different tauopathies.

DOI: 10.1152/physrev.00024.2003
PMID: 15044677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Rom J Morphol Embryol. 2017;58(4):1141-1150.

Tau protein in neurodegenerative diseases - a review.

Pîrşcoveanu DFV(1), Pirici I, Tudorică V, Bălşeanu TA, Albu VC, Bondari S, 
Bumbea AM, Pîrşcoveanu M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Rehabilitation, University of Medicine and Pharmacy of 
Craiova, Romania; anamariabumbea@yahoo.com.

The study of rare, inherited forms of different diseases resulted in the 
discovery of gene defects that cause inherited variants of the respective 
diseases. The defective genes were found to encode major molecular players 
leading to the neuropathological lesions or factors that characterize these 
diseases. The exact role of the tau protein in the neurodegenerative process is 
still under debate. It is very important to understand the normal biological 
roles of tau and the specific events that induce tau to become neurotoxic. Tau 
is the major microtubule-associated protein (MAP) of a mature neuron. The other 
neuronal MAPs are MAP1 and MAP2. These three MAPs perform similar function, 
promoting assembly and stability of microtubules. Tau protein was isolated as a 
microtubule-associated factor in the porcine brain. It was isolated as a protein 
that co-purified with tubulin and had the ability to promote microtubule 
assembly in vitro. Normal adult human brain tau contains 2-3 moles 
phosphate÷mole of tau protein. Hyperphosphorylation of tau depress this 
biological activity of tau. Almost 80 diseases caused by missense mutations and 
intronic mutations in the tau gene have been found in familial cases of 
frontotemporal dementia (FTD). In Alzheimer's disease (AD), there are 
intraneuronal neurofibrillary tangles composed of the microtubule-associated 
protein tau (MAPT). In other neurodegenerative diseases, there are similar 
deposits of tau, in the absence of extracellular deposits (progressive 
supranuclear palsy, corticobasal degeneration, argyrophilic grain disease, 
etc.). Tau pathology is also often seen in some forms of Parkinson's disease 
(PD) and prion diseases. In genetic forms of FTD, mutations in tau implicate 
abnormal tau as the initiation of neurodegeneration. In FTD, there are deposits 
especially in temporal and frontal lobes, regions that are very important for 
behavior and executive function. It is critical to understand how tau becomes 
pathogenic, in order to consider developing any strategies for treatment.

PMID: 29556602 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 May 2;25(9):4969. doi: 10.3390/ijms25094969.

The Enigma of Tau Protein Aggregation: Mechanistic Insights and Future 
Challenges.

Zheng H(1), Sun H(1), Cai Q(1), Tai HC(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Vaccines for Infectious Diseases, Xiang An 
Biomedicine Laboratory, State Key Laboratory of Molecular Vaccinology and 
Molecular Diagnostics, National Innovation Platform for Industry-Education 
Integration in Vaccine Research, School of Public Health, Xiamen University, 
Xiamen 361102, China.

Tau protein misfolding and aggregation are pathological hallmarks of Alzheimer's 
disease and over twenty neurodegenerative disorders. However, the molecular 
mechanisms of tau aggregation in vivo remain incompletely understood. There are 
two types of tau aggregates in the brain: soluble aggregates (oligomers and 
protofibrils) and insoluble filaments (fibrils). Compared to filamentous 
aggregates, soluble aggregates are more toxic and exhibit prion-like 
transmission, providing seeds for templated misfolding. Curiously, in its native 
state, tau is a highly soluble, heat-stable protein that does not form fibrils 
by itself, not even when hyperphosphorylated. In vitro studies have found that 
negatively charged molecules such as heparin, RNA, or arachidonic acid are 
generally required to induce tau aggregation. Two recent breakthroughs have 
provided new insights into tau aggregation mechanisms. First, as an 
intrinsically disordered protein, tau is found to undergo liquid-liquid phase 
separation (LLPS) both in vitro and inside cells. Second, cryo-electron 
microscopy has revealed diverse fibrillar tau conformations associated with 
different neurodegenerative disorders. Nonetheless, only the fibrillar core is 
structurally resolved, and the remainder of the protein appears as a "fuzzy 
coat". From this review, it appears that further studies are required (1) to 
clarify the role of LLPS in tau aggregation; (2) to unveil the structural 
features of soluble tau aggregates; (3) to understand the involvement of fuzzy 
coat regions in oligomer and fibril formation.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25094969
PMCID: PMC11084794
PMID: 38732197 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


4. Brain Res Brain Res Rev. 2000 Aug;33(1):95-130. doi: 
10.1016/s0165-0173(00)00019-9.

Tau protein isoforms, phosphorylation and role in neurodegenerative disorders.

Buée L(1), Bussière T, Buée-Scherrer V, Delacourte A, Hof PR.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U422, Place de Verdun, 59045 cedex, Lille, France. 
Luc.Buee@lille.inserm.fr

Tau proteins belong to the family of microtubule-associated proteins. They are 
mainly expressed in neurons where they play an important role in the assembly of 
tubulin monomers into microtubules to constitute the neuronal microtubules 
network. Microtubules are involved in maintaining the cell shape and serve as 
tracks for axonal transport. Tau proteins also establish some links between 
microtubules and other cytoskeletal elements or proteins. Tau proteins are 
translated from a single gene located on chromosome 17. Their expression is 
developmentally regulated by an alternative splicing mechanism and six different 
isoforms exist in the human adult brain. Tau proteins are the major constituents 
of intraneuronal and glial fibrillar lesions described in Alzheimer's disease 
and numerous neurodegenerative disorders referred to as 'tauopathies'. Molecular 
analysis has revealed that an abnormal phosphorylation might be one of the 
important events in the process leading to their aggregation. Moreover, a 
specific set of pathological tau proteins exhibiting a typical biochemical 
pattern, and a different regional and laminar distribution could characterize 
each of these disorders. Finally, a direct correlation has been established 
between the progressive involvement of the neocortical areas and the increasing 
severity of dementia, suggesting that pathological tau proteins are reliable 
marker of the neurodegenerative process. The recent discovery of tau gene 
mutations in frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 
has reinforced the predominant role attributed to tau proteins in the 
pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders, and underlined the fact that 
distinct sets of tau isoforms expressed in different neuronal populations could 
lead to different pathologies.

DOI: 10.1016/s0165-0173(00)00019-9
PMID: 10967355 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Eur J Med Chem. 2017 Oct 20;139:153-167. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2017.07.070. Epub 
2017 Jul 29.

Tau protein aggregation in Alzheimer's disease: An attractive target for the 
development of novel therapeutic agents.

Jouanne M(1), Rault S(1), Voisin-Chiret AS(2).

Author information:
(1)Université Caen Normandie, France; UNICAEN, CERMN - EA 4258, FR CNRS 3038 
INC3M, SF 4206 ICORE, bd Becquerel, F-14032 Caen, France.
(2)Université Caen Normandie, France; UNICAEN, CERMN - EA 4258, FR CNRS 3038 
INC3M, SF 4206 ICORE, bd Becquerel, F-14032 Caen, France. Electronic address: 
anne-sophie.voisin@unicaen.fr.

Alzheimer's Disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative brain disorder in which many 
biological dysfunctions are involved. Among them, two main types of lesions were 
discovered and widely studied: the amyloid plaques and the neurofibrillary 
tangles (NFTs). These two lesions are caused by the dysfunction and the 
accumulation of two proteins which are, respectively, the beta-amyloid peptide 
and the tau protein. The process that leads these two proteins to aggregate is 
complex and is the subject of current studies. After a brief description of the 
aggregation mechanisms, we will provide an overview of new therapeutic agents 
targeting the different dysfunctions and toxic species found during aggregation.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2017.07.070
PMID: 28800454 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. ChemMedChem. 2024 Nov 4;19(21):e202400180. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.202400180. Epub 
2024 Sep 22.

Tau Protein and Tauopathies: Exploring Tau Protein-Protein and Microtubule 
Interactions, Cross-Interactions and Therapeutic Strategies.

Di Lorenzo D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Organic and Bioorganic Chemistry, Bielefeld 
University, Universitätsstraße 25, D-33615, Bielefeld, Germany.

Tau, a microtubule-associated protein (MAP), is essential to maintaining 
neuronal stability and function in the healthy brain. However, aberrant 
modifications and pathological aggregations of Tau are implicated in various 
neurodegenerative disorders, collectively known as tauopathies. The most common 
Tauopathy is Alzheimer's Disease (AD) counting nowadays more than 60 million 
patients worldwide. This comprehensive review delves into the multifaceted realm 
of Tau protein, puzzling out its intricate involvement in both physiological and 
pathological roles. Emphasis is put on Tau Protein-Protein Interactions (PPIs), 
depicting its interaction with tubulin, microtubules and its cross-interaction 
with other proteins such as Aβ1-42, α-synuclein, and the chaperone machinery. In 
the realm of therapeutic strategies, an overview of diverse possibilities is 
presented with their relative clinical progresses. The focus is mostly addressed 
to Tau protein aggregation inhibitors including recent small molecules, short 
peptides and peptidomimetics with specific focus on compounds that showed a 
double anti aggregative activity on both Tau protein and Aβ amyloid peptide. 
This review amalgamates current knowledge on Tau protein and evolving 
therapeutic strategies, providing a comprehensive resource for researchers 
seeking to deepen their understanding of the Tau protein and for scientists 
involved in the development of new peptide-based anti-aggregative Tau compounds.

© 2024 The Author(s). ChemMedChem published by Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/cmdc.202400180
PMID: 39031682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Chembiochem. 2024 Nov 18;25(22):e202400566. doi: 10.1002/cbic.202400566. Epub 
2024 Nov 4.

Untangling the Complexity and Impact of Tau Protein Ubiquitination.

Trivellato D(1), Munari F(1), Assfalg M(1), Capaldi S(1), D'Onofrio M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, University of Verona, 37134, Verona, Italy.

The microtubule-associated protein tau is an intrinsically disordered protein 
highly expressed in neuronal axons. In healthy neurons, tau regulates 
microtubule dynamics and neurite outgrowth. However, pathological conditions can 
trigger aberrant tau aggregation into insoluble filaments, a hallmark of 
neurodegenerative disorders known as tauopathies. Tau undergoes diverse 
posttranslational modifications (PTMs), suggesting complex regulation and 
potentially varied functions. Among PTMs, the role and mechanisms of 
ubiquitination in physiology and disease have remained enigmatic. The past three 
decades have witnessed the emergence of key studies on tau protein 
ubiquitination. In this concept, we discuss how these investigations have begun 
to shed light on the ubiquitination patterns of physiological and pathological 
tau, the responsible enzymatic machinery, and the influence of ubiquitination on 
tau aggregation. We also provide an overview of the semi-synthetic methods that 
have enabled in vitro investigations of conformational transitions of tau 
induced by ubiquitin modification. Finally, we discuss future perspectives in 
the field necessary to elucidate the molecular mechanisms of tau ubiquitination 
and clearance.

© 2024 The Author(s). ChemBioChem published by Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/cbic.202400566
PMID: 39291301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Mol Neurosci. 2023 Oct;73(9-10):693-712. doi: 10.1007/s12031-023-02143-w. Epub 
2023 Aug 22.

Spreading of Tau Protein Does Not Depend on Aggregation Propensity.

Rodrigues S(1), Anglada-Huguet M(1), Hochgräfe K(1), Kaniyappan S(1)(2)(3), 
Wegmann S(4), Mandelkow EM(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)DZNE, German Ctr. for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Venusberg-Campus 1/99, 
53127, Bonn, Germany.
(2)CAESAR Research Center, Ludwig-Erhard-Allee 2, 53175, Bonn, Germany.
(3)Department of Neurodegenerative Diseases and Gerontopsychiatry, University of 
Bonn Medical School, Bonn, Germany.
(4)DZNE, German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Chariteplatz 1, 10117, 
Berlin, Germany.
(5)DZNE, German Ctr. for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Venusberg-Campus 1/99, 
53127, Bonn, Germany. eva.mandelkow@dzne.de.
(6)CAESAR Research Center, Ludwig-Erhard-Allee 2, 53175, Bonn, Germany. 
eva.mandelkow@dzne.de.

The stereotypical progression of Tau pathology during Alzheimer disease has been 
attributed to trans-neuronal spreading of misfolded Tau proteins, followed by 
prion-like templated aggregation of Tau. The nature of Tau and the cellular 
mechanisms of Tau spreading are still under debate. We hypothesized that Tau's 
propensity for aggregation would correlate with its ability to spread across 
synapses and propagate pathology. To study the progressive propagation of Tau 
proteins in brain regions relevant for Alzheimer disease, we used mice 
expressing near-physiological levels of full-length human Tau protein carrying 
pro-aggregant (TauΔK280, TauΔK) or anti-aggregant (TauΔK280-PP, TauΔK-PP) 
mutations in the entorhinal cortex (EC). To enhance Tau expression in the EC, we 
performed EC injections of adeno-associated virus (AAV) particles encoding TauΔK 
or TauΔK-PP. The brains of injected and non-injected EC/TauΔK and EC/TauΔK-PP 
mice were studied by immunohistological and biochemical techniques to detect Tau 
propagation to dentate gyrus (DG) neurons and Tau-induced pathological changes. 
Pro- and anti-aggregant mice had comparable low transgene expression (~0.2 times 
endogenous mouse Tau). They accumulated human Tau at similar rates and only in 
expressing EC neurons, including their axonal projections of the perforant path 
and presynaptic terminals in the molecular layer of the DG. Pro-aggregant 
EC/TauΔK mice showed misfolded Tau and synaptic protein alterations in EC 
neurons, not observed in anti-aggregant EC/TauΔK-PP mice. Additional 
AAV-mediated expression of TauΔK or TauΔK-PP in EC/TauΔK or EC/TauΔK-PP mice, 
respectively, increased the human Tau expression to ~0.65 times endogenous mouse 
Tau, with comparable spreading of TauΔK and TauΔK-PP throughout the EC. There 
was a low level of transcellular propagation of Tau protein, without 
pathological phosphorylation or misfolding, as judged by diagnostic antibodies. 
Additionally, TauΔK but not TauΔK-PP expression induced hippocampal 
astrogliosis. Low levels of pro- or anti-aggregant full-length Tau show 
equivalent distributions in EC neurons, independent of their aggregation 
propensity. Increasing the expression via AAV induce local Tau misfolding in the 
EC neurons, synaptotoxicity, and astrogliosis and lead to a low level of 
detectable trans-neuronal spreading of Tau. This depends on its concentration in 
the EC, but, contrary to expectations, does not depend on Tau's aggregation 
propensity/misfolding and does not lead to templated misfolding in recipient 
neurons.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12031-023-02143-w
PMCID: PMC10694122
PMID: 37606769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


9. J Neurosci. 2002 Nov 1;22(21):9340-51. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-21-09340.2002.

Abundant tau filaments and nonapoptotic neurodegeneration in transgenic mice 
expressing human P301S tau protein.

Allen B(1), Ingram E, Takao M, Smith MJ, Jakes R, Virdee K, Yoshida H, Holzer M, 
Craxton M, Emson PC, Atzori C, Migheli A, Crowther RA, Ghetti B, Spillantini MG, 
Goedert M.

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge CB2 2QH, 
United Kingdom.

The identification of mutations in the Tau gene in frontotemporal dementia and 
parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17) has made it possible to express 
human tau protein with pathogenic mutations in transgenic animals. Here we 
report on the production and characterization of a line of mice transgenic for 
the 383 aa isoform of human tau with the P301S mutation. At 5-6 months of age, 
homozygous animals from this line developed a neurological phenotype dominated 
by a severe paraparesis. According to light microscopy, many nerve cells in 
brain and spinal cord were strongly immunoreactive for hyperphosphorylated tau. 
According to electron microscopy, abundant filaments made of hyperphosphorylated 
tau protein were present. The majority of filaments resembled the half-twisted 
ribbons described previously in cases of FTDP-17, with a minority of filaments 
resembling the paired helical filaments of Alzheimer's disease. 
Sarkosyl-insoluble tau from brains and spinal cords of transgenic mice ran as a 
hyperphosphorylated 64 kDa band, the same apparent molecular mass as that of the 
383 aa tau isoform in the human tauopathies. Perchloric acid-soluble tau was 
also phosphorylated at many sites, with the notable exception of serine 214. In 
the spinal cord, neurodegeneration was present, as indicated by a 49% reduction 
in the number of motor neurons. No evidence for apoptosis was obtained, despite 
the extensive colocalization of hyperphosphorylated tau protein with activated 
MAP kinase family members. The latter may be involved in the 
hyperphosphorylation of tau.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-21-09340.2002
PMCID: PMC6758022
PMID: 12417659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Alzheimers Dis. 2019;69(2):339-353. doi: 10.3233/JAD-180917.

Tau Protein and Zebrafish Models for Tau-Induced Neurodegeneration.

Ding Y(1), Lei L(1), Lai C(2), Tang Z(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The First Affliated Hospital of Guizhou 
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Guiyang, Guizhou, China.
(2)Clinical Research Center, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guizhou University 
of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Guiyang, Guizhou, China.

Tauopathies are a specific type of slow and progressive neurodegeneration, which 
involves intracellular deposition of fibrillar material composed of abnormal 
hyperphosphorylation of the microtubule associated protein (MAP) tau. Despite 
many years of intensive research, our understanding of the molecular events that 
lead to neurodegeneration is far from complete. No effective therapeutic 
treatments have been defined, and questions surround the validity and utility of 
existing animal models. It is an urgent need to develop a novel animal model to 
study the underlying neurodegenerative mechanisms of tauopathies. Zebrafish 
models of tauopathies could complement existing models by providing an in vivo 
platform for genetic and chemical screens in order to identify new therapeutic 
targets and compounds, meanwhile zebrafish models have permitted discovery of 
unique characteristics of these genes that could have been difficultly observed 
in other models. Novel transgenic zebrafish models expressing wild-type or 
mutant forms of human 4R-tau in neurons have recently been reported. These 
studies show disease-relevant changes including tau hyperphosphorylation, 
aggregation and somato-dendritic relocalization. This review highlights the 
availability of transgenic tau zebrafish models that allow more detailed 
biochemical studies of tau in the zebrafish CNS to characterize solubility, 
fibril morphology and further clarify phosphorylation proceedings. Furthermore, 
a deeper knowledge of the zebrafish brain and a better characterization of tau 
caused by alterations in neurodegenerative disorders are needed.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-180917
PMID: 31006683 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2020 Mar;99:202-214. doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2019.06.007. 
Epub 2019 Jul 4.

Biomolecular condensation of the microtubule-associated protein tau.

Ukmar-Godec T(1), Wegmann S(2), Zweckstetter M(3).

Author information:
(1)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Von-Siebold-Str. 3a, 
37075, Göttingen, Germany; Department of Neurology, University Medical Center 
Göttingen, University of Göttingen, Waldweg 33, 37073, Göttingen, Germany.
(2)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Chariteplatz 1, 10117, 
Berlin, Germany. Electronic address: Susanne.Wegmann@dzne.de.
(3)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Von-Siebold-Str. 3a, 
37075, Göttingen, Germany; Department of Neurology, University Medical Center 
Göttingen, University of Göttingen, Waldweg 33, 37073, Göttingen, Germany; 
Department for NMR-based Structural Biology, Max Planck Institute for 
Biophysical Chemistry, Am Faßberg 11, 37077, Göttingen, Germany. Electronic 
address: Markus.Zweckstetter@dzne.de.

Cells contain multiple compartments dedicated to the regulation and control of 
biochemical reactions. Cellular compartments that are not surrounded by 
membranes can rapidly form and dissolve in response to changes in the cellular 
environment. The physicochemical processes that underlie the formation of 
non-membrane-bound compartments in vivo are connected to liquid-liquid phase 
separation of proteins and nucleic acids in vitro. Recent evidence suggests that 
the protein tau, which plays an important role in Alzheimer's disease and other 
neurodegenerative disorders, phase separates in solution, forms tau phases with 
microtubules, and associates with phase-separated RNA-binding protein granules 
in cells. Here we review the experimental evidence that supports the ability of 
tau to phase separate in solution and form biomolecular condensates in cells. As 
for other disease-relevant proteins, the physiological and pathological 
functions of tau are tightly connected - through loss of normal function or gain 
of toxic function - and we therefore discuss how tau phase separation plays a 
role for both, and with respect to different cellular functions of tau.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2019.06.007
PMID: 31260737 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Cytoskeleton (Hoboken). 2024 Jan;81(1):78-82. doi: 10.1002/cm.21796. Epub 2023 
Oct 12.

The discovery of tau protein.

Kirschner M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA.

In January of this year I received an unexpected request from George Bloom to 
contribute an historical perspective on "the discovery of tau protein," an event 
that occurred roughly 50 years ago. My first thought was that it could not have 
been that long ago, as the memories of what was my first independent scientific 
discovery are still fresh in my mind today. But 50 years is half a century and, 
as I thought about the events, I realized how much the practice of science has 
changed.

© 2023 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/cm.21796
PMID: 37823566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Neuroscience. 2023 May 10;518:64-69. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2022.04.024. 
Epub 2022 May 4.

Tau Aggregation.

Hernández F(1), Ferrer I(2), Pérez M(3), Zabala JC(4), Del Rio JA(5), Avila 
J(6).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular 'Severo Ochoa' (CBMSO) CSIC/UAM, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Department of Pathology and Experimental Therapeutics, University of 
Barcelona, Bellvitge, University Hospital-IDIBELL, Hospitalet de Llobregat, 
Spain; Department of Cell Biology, Physiology and Immunology, Faculty of 
Biology, Universitat de Barcelona, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Departamento de Anatomía Histología y Neurociencia, Facultad de Medicina UAM, 
Madrid, Spain.
(4)Department of Molecular Biology, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de 
Cantabria, Santander 39005 Spain.
(5)Institute for Bioengineering of Catalonia (IBEC), The Barcelona Institute of 
Science and Technology, 08028 Barcelona, Spain; Department of Cell Biology, 
Physiology and Immunology, Faculty of Biology, Universitat de Barcelona, 08028 
Barcelona, Spain; Institute of Neuroscience, University of Barcelona, 08028 
Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Centro de Biología Molecular 'Severo Ochoa' (CBMSO) CSIC/UAM, Madrid, Spain; 
Networking Research Centre on Neurodegenerative Diseases (CIBERNED), 28031 
Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: javila@cbm.csic.es.

Here we revisit tau protein aggregation at primary, secondary, tertiary and 
quaternary structures. In addition, the presence of non-aggregated tau protein, 
which has been recently discovered, is also commented on.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2022.04.024
PMID: 35525497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Eur J Pharmacol. 2020 Nov 15;887:173554. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2020.173554. Epub 
2020 Sep 15.

Alzheimer's disease: Recent treatment strategies.

Vaz M(1), Silvestre S(2).

Author information:
(1)CICS-UBI - Health Sciences Research Centre, University of Beira Interior, 
Covilhã, Portugal.
(2)CICS-UBI - Health Sciences Research Centre, University of Beira Interior, 
Covilhã, Portugal; CNC- Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of 
Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal. Electronic address: samuel@fcsaude.ubi.pt.

Alzheimer Disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disease characterized by two 
neuropathological hallmarks: extracellular deposition of amyloid plaques and 
intracellular neurofibrillary tangles. Current treatment for AD (donepezil, 
galantamine, rivastigmine and memantine) is only symptomatic and has modest 
benefits. Thus, the development of drugs with the potential to change the 
progression of the disease has been a priority. Therapies targeting amyloid β 
have been the focus for almost 30 years. However, highly promising drugs 
recently failed to show clinical benefits in phase III trials. Even the positive 
findings presented by Biogen on Aducanumab are not entirely clear and further 
data is necessary to confirm its validity. Therefore, researchers are turning 
their efforts around to tau-targeting therapies, since tau protein appears to be 
better correlated with the severity of cognitive decline than amyloid β. 
Currently, most anti-tau agents in clinical trials are immunotherapies and they 
are in the early stages of clinical research. Four monoclonal antibodies 
anti-tau (Gosuranemab, Tilavonemab, Semorinemab and Zagotenemab) and one 
anti-tau vaccine (AADvac1) have reached phase II, so far. In this review, we 
discuss the potential disease-modifying agents tested in clinical trials and 
update the information of drugs that are still under clinical evaluation.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2020.173554
PMID: 32941929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Handb Clin Neurol. 2017;145:355-368. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-802395-2.00025-0.

Tauopathies.

Kovacs GG(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neurology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. 
Electronic address: gabor.kovacs@meduniwien.ac.at.

Tauopathies are neurodegenerative disorders characterized by the deposition of 
abnormal tau protein in the brain. The spectrum of tau pathologies expands 
beyond the traditionally discussed disease forms like Pick disease, progressive 
supranuclear palsy, corticobasal degeneration, and argyrophilic grain disease. 
Emerging entities and pathologies include globular glial tauopathies, primary 
age-related tauopathy, which includes neurofibrillary tangle dementia, chronic 
traumatic encephalopathy (CTE), and aging-related tau astrogliopathy. Clinical 
symptoms include frontotemporal dementia, corticobasal syndrome, Richardson 
syndrome, parkinsonism, pure akinesia with gait freezing and, rarely, motor 
neuron symptoms or cerebellar ataxia. Some disorders show specific neuroimaging 
features, while examination of the cerebrospinal fluid awaits markers for in 
vivo stratification of cases. The possibility of cell-to-cell propagation is a 
novel aspect of the pathogenesis of tauopathies, which is partly reflected by 
the hierarchic involvement of anatomic regions. This concept might have 
relevance for the development of therapies. For cost-effective screening for tau 
pathologies in neuropathologic practice, examination of the hippocampus, 
amygdala, and basal ganglia is recommended. Uncommon morphologies or unusually 
extensive forms of tau pathologies should raise the suspicion of a genetic 
background. Ongoing multidisciplinary studies are needed to understand the whole 
spectrum and significance of tau pathologies.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-802395-2.00025-0
PMID: 28987182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Nat Rev Neurol. 2023 Aug;19(8):459. doi: 10.1038/s41582-023-00851-w.

Disease-specific modifications of tau protein.

Kiani L(1).

Author information:
(1)Nature Reviews Neurology, . nrneuro@nature.com.

Comment on
    Nat Commun. 2023 Jun 22;14(1):3706. doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-39328-1.

DOI: 10.1038/s41582-023-00851-w
PMID: 37402804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Biochem Cell Biol. 2017 Jun;95(3):338-349. doi: 10.1139/bcb-2016-0227. Epub 2017 
Mar 9.

Structural evaluations of tau protein conformation: methodologies and 
approaches.

Zabik NL(1)(1), Imhof MM(1)(1), Martic-Milne S(1)(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Oakland University, Rochester, MI 48309, USA.

Protein-misfolding diseases are based on a common principle of aggregation 
initiated by intra- and inter-molecular contacts. The structural and 
conformational changes induced by biochemical transformations such as 
post-translational modifications (PTMs), often lead to protein unfolding and 
misfolding. Thus, these order-to-disorder or disorder-to-order transitions may 
regulate cellular function. Tau, a neuronal protein, regulates microtubule (MT) 
structure and overall cellular integrity. However, misfolded tau modified by 
PTMs results in MT destabilization, toxic tau aggregate formation, and 
ultimately cell death, leading to neurodegeneration. Currently, the lack of 
structural information surrounding tau severely limits understanding of 
neurodegeneration. This minireview focuses on the current methodologies and 
approaches aimed at probing tau conformation and the role of conformation in 
various aspects of tau biochemistry. The recent applications of nuclear magnetic 
resonance, mass spectrometry, Förster resonance electron transfer, and molecular 
dynamics simulations toward structural analysis of conformational landscapes of 
tau will be described. The strategies developed for structural evaluation of tau 
may significantly improve our understanding of misfolding diseases.

DOI: 10.1139/bcb-2016-0227
PMCID: PMC6145104
PMID: 28278386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 2024 Oct;196(10):7476-7502. doi: 
10.1007/s12010-024-04960-0. Epub 2024 May 2.

Recent Progress in the Application of Tau Protein Biosensors for Diagnosis of 
Neurodegenerative Diseases.

Nazir S(1), Iqbal RA(2).

Author information:
(1)Wolfson Nanomaterials & Devices Laboratory, School of Computing, Electronics 
and Mathematics, Plymouth University, Devon, PL4 8AA, UK. 
sophia.nazir@plymouth.ac.uk.
(2)C.M.H Lahore Medical College, University of Health Sciences, Abdur Rahman 
Road, Lahore Cantt, Pakistan.

The microtubule-associated Tau protein is found in the central nervous system 
(CNS) in six major isoforms. Neurodegenerative diseases have been linked to 
post-translational changes of Tau, most notably phosphorylation. Tau protein's 
molecular diversity is highly helpful in the identification of neurodegenerative 
illnesses. Nonetheless, one major obstacle to the early detection of brain 
illness is the nanoscale identification of tau proteins. The standard methods 
for identifying tau protein include western blotting, polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR), and real-time PCR. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) is another 
approach used. The limited sensitivity and specificity of these detections, 
together with the need for sophisticated equipment, are some of their drawbacks. 
The development of innovative and complex methods for tau protein screening is 
necessary to address the aforementioned issues. Biosensors are a cutting-edge 
instrument that may help identify various neurodegenerative biomarkers as early 
as feasible. This paper provides an overview of the most recent developments in 
the detection of neurodegenerative diseases employing biosensors built on 
nanotechnology and methods for imaging, electrochemical, and optical detection 
of the Tau protein. Furthermore, we outline the present difficulties and suggest 
a possible course for biosensor-based detection and intervention in the future.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12010-024-04960-0
PMID: 38696096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations Ethics Approval This article does 
not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by any of 
the authors. Consent to Participate Done. Consent for Publication Done. 
Competing Interests The authors declare no competing interests.


19. Neurobiol Aging. 1994;15 Suppl 2:S85-6. doi: 10.1016/0197-4580(94)90178-3.

Tau protein and Alzheimer's disease.

Mandelkow EM(1), Mandelkow E.

Author information:
(1)Max-Planck-Gesellschaft Research Institute, Hamburg, Germany.

The etiology of Alzheimer's disease is still unknown. Because the disease is 
specific for human brain, a rational search for early diagnosis or prevention is 
very difficult. This calls for the development of cellular models that mimick 
the degeneration of neurons in AD. The brains of AD patients contain markers 
whose composition and location is characteristic of the disease; one of the most 
reliable markers is tau protein in its pathologically phosphorylated and 
aggregated form. This form of tau can serve as a guide to the origins of the 
pathology. One goal of research that should be feasible within the near future 
is to construct a cell that induces the same abnormal changes in tau protein in 
response to defined stimuli (extracellular signals, toxins, stress, etc.). This 
model can then be used to identify possible substances that might cause the 
disease, or identify strategies for preventing it. Once they are defined on a 
cellular level, the next step would be to test them on (transgenic) animal 
models which are being developed at present.

DOI: 10.1016/0197-4580(94)90178-3
PMID: 7700470 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2019;1184:341-357. doi: 10.1007/978-981-32-9358-8_25.

Liquid-Liquid Phase Separation of Tau Protein in Neurobiology and Pathology.

Wegmann S(1).

Author information:
(1)Deutsches Zentrum für Neurodegenerative Erkrankungen (DZNE), Berlin, Germany. 
susanne.wegmann@dzne.de.

Tau is an intrinsically unfolded protein that, aside from its important role in 
the regulation of microtubule stability, harbors an emerging number of other 
functions. In order to find explanations for some longtime unsolved aspects of 
neuronal tau biology in the brain, we may have to step aside from observing tau 
molecules in dilute solutions, and from assuming a mono-molecular 
physicochemical behavior of molecules in the cell. Liquid condensed phases of 
tau proteins, which form through the biophysical process of liquid-liquid phase 
separation (LLPS), behave like liquids and thereby offer a new regime of 
interactions in the cell. So far, there is evidence that tau condensates (i) 
play a role for neurodegenerative diseases by transitioning into aggregated 
forms of tau, (ii) are involved in microtubule binding, nucleation, and 
bundling, and (iii) are interacting with RNA molecules, which could impact RNA 
homeostasis and transcription. Likewise the functions of monomeric tau, also tau 
condensation is regulated by post-translational modifications and can be 
influenced by the local environment, for example in neuronal sub-compartments. 
However, we are just beginning to understand the physicochemistry of tau LLPS, 
and the biological role of tau condensation has to be explored in the next 
years.

DOI: 10.1007/978-981-32-9358-8_25
PMID: 32096048 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Mol Neurosci. 2022 Aug;72(8):1557-1571. doi: 10.1007/s12031-022-02002-0. Epub 
2022 Mar 24.

The Role of Post-Translational Modifications on the Structure and Function of 
Tau Protein.

Ye H(1)(2)(3), Han Y(1)(2)(3), Li P(1)(2)(3), Su Z(1)(2)(3), Huang Y(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Industrial Fermentation (Ministry of Education), Hubei 
University of Technology, Wuhan, 430068, China.
(2)Hubei Key Laboratory of Industrial Microbiology, Hubei University of 
Technology, Wuhan, 430068, China.
(3)Department of Biological Engineering, Hubei University of Technology, Wuhan, 
430068, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Industrial Fermentation (Ministry of Education), Hubei 
University of Technology, Wuhan, 430068, China. yqhuang@hbut.edu.cn.
(5)Hubei Key Laboratory of Industrial Microbiology, Hubei University of 
Technology, Wuhan, 430068, China. yqhuang@hbut.edu.cn.
(6)Department of Biological Engineering, Hubei University of Technology, Wuhan, 
430068, China. yqhuang@hbut.edu.cn.

Involving addition of chemical groups or protein units to specific residues of 
the target protein, post-translational modifications (PTMs) alter the charge, 
hydrophobicity, and conformation of a protein, which in tune influences protein 
function, protein - protein interaction, and protein aggregation. While the 
occurrence of PTMs is dynamic and subject to regulations, conformational 
disorder of the target protein facilitates PTMs. The microtubule-associated 
protein tau is a typical intrinsically disordered protein that undergoes a 
variety of PTMs including phosphorylation, acetylation, ubiquitination, 
methylation, and oxidation. Accumulated evidence shows that these PTMs play a 
critical role in regulating tau-microtubule interaction, tau localization, tau 
degradation and aggregation, and reinforces the correlation between tau PTMs and 
pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disease. Here, we review tau PTMs with an 
emphasis on their influence on tau structure. With available biophysical 
characterization results, we describe how PTMs induce conformational changes in 
tau monomer and regulate tau aggregation. Compared to functional analysis of tau 
PTMs, biophysical characterization of tau PTMs is lagging. While it is 
challenging, characterizing the specific effects of PTMs on tau conformation and 
interaction is indispensable to unravel the tau PTM code.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12031-022-02002-0
PMID: 35325356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2005 Jan 3;1739(2-3):179-97. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbadis.2004.06.020.

Tau protein as a differential biomarker of tauopathies.

Sergeant N(1), Delacourte A, Buée L.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U422, 1, Place de Verdun, 59045 Lille cedex, France.

Microtubule-associated Tau proteins are the basic component of intraneuronal and 
glial inclusions observed in many neurological disorders, the so-called 
tauopathies. Many etiological factors, phosphorylation, splicing, and mutations, 
relate Tau proteins to neurodegeneration. Molecular analysis has revealed that 
hyperphosphorylation and abnormal phosphorylation might be one of the important 
events in the process leading to tau intracellular aggregation. Specific set of 
pathological tau proteins exhibiting a typical biochemical pattern, and a 
different regional and laminar distribution, could characterize five main 
classes of tauopathies. A direct correlation has been established between the 
regional brain distribution of tau pathology and clinical symptoms; for instance 
progressive involvement of neocortical areas is well correlated to the severity 
of dementia in Alzheimer's disease, overall suggesting that pathological tau 
proteins are reliable marker of the neurodegenerative process. Recent discovery 
of tau gene mutations in frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism linked to 
chromosome 17 has reinforced the predominant role attributed to tau proteins in 
the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders, and underlined the fact that 
distinct sets of tau isoforms expressed in different neuronal populations could 
lead to different pathologies. Overall, a better knowledge of the etiological 
factors responsible for the aggregation of tau proteins in brain diseases is 
essential for development of future differential diagnosis and therapeutic 
strategies. They would hopefully find their application against Alzheimer's 
disease but also in all neurological disorders for which a dysfunction of Tau 
biology has been identified.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2004.06.020
PMID: 15615637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Alzheimers Dis. 2018;62(3):1277-1285. doi: 10.3233/JAD-170600.

Our Working Point of View of Tau Protein.

Avila J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa (CSIC-UAM), Madrid, Spain.
(2)CIBERNED, Madrid, Spain.

Tau protein, which was discovered in Prof. Kirschner's laboratory in 1975, has 
been the focus of my research over the last 40 years. In this issue of the 
Journal of Alzheimer's Disease commemorating its 20th year of publication, I 
will provide a short review of some of the features of my relationship with tau.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-170600
PMCID: PMC5870002
PMID: 29036830 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1996 Jan 17;777:121-31. doi: 
10.1111/j.1749-6632.1996.tb34410.x.

Tau protein and the neurofibrillary pathology of Alzheimer's disease.

Goedert M(1).

Author information:
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Abundant neurofibrillary tangles, neuropil threads and senile plaque neurites 
constitute the neurofibrillary pathology of Alzheimer's disease. They form in 
the nerve cells that undergo degeneration in the disease, in which their 
regional distribution correlates with the degree of dementia. Each lesion 
contains the paired helical filament (PHF) as its major component. PHFs are 
composed of the microtubule-associated protein tau in a hyperphosphorylated 
state. PHF-tau is hyperphosphorylated on all six adult brain isoforms. As a 
consequence, tau is unable to bind to microtubules and is believed to 
self-assemble into the PHF. Several candidate protein kinases and protein 
phosphatases have been identified through in vitro experiments.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1996.tb34410.x
PMID: 8624074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Sci Rep. 2020 Mar 23;10(1):5225. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-61777-7.

Tau protein- induced sequestration of the eukaryotic ribosome: Implications in 
neurodegenerative disease.

Banerjee S(1), Ferdosh S(1), Ghosh AN(2), Barat C(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, St. Xavier's College, Park Street, Kolkata, 
700016, West Bengal, India.
(2)National Institute of Cholera and Enteric Diseases P-33, C.I.T. Road, Scheme 
XM, Beleghata, India.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, St. Xavier's College, Park Street, Kolkata, 
700016, West Bengal, India. chandanasgb@yahoo.com.

The human tau is a microtubule-associated intrinsically unstructured protein 
that forms intraneuronal cytotoxic deposits in neurodegenerative diseases, like 
tauopathies. Recent studies indicate that in Alzheimer's disease, ribosomal 
dysfunction might be a crucial event in the disease pathology. Our earlier 
studies had demonstrated that amorphous protein aggregation in the presence of 
ribosome can lead to sequestration of the ribosomal components. The present 
study aims at determining the effect of incubation of the full-length tau 
protein (Ht40) and its microtubule binding 4-repeat domain (K18) on the 
eukaryotic ribosome. Our in vitro studies show that incubation of Ht40 and the 
K18 tau variants with isolated non-translating yeast ribosome can induce a loss 
of ribosome physical integrity resulting in formation of tau-rRNA-ribosomal 
protein aggregates. Incubation with the tau protein variants also led to a 
disappearance of the peak indicating the ribosome profile of the HeLa cell 
lysate and suppression of translation in the human in vitro translation system. 
The incubation of tau protein with the ribosomal RNA leads to the formation of 
tau-rRNA aggregates. The effect of K18 on the yeast ribosome can be mitigated in 
the presence of cellular polyanions like heparin and tRNA, thereby indicating 
the electrostatic nature of the aggregation process.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-61777-7
PMCID: PMC7090008
PMID: 32251304 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


26. CNS Neurosci Ther. 2024 Jun;30(6):e14304. doi: 10.1111/cns.14304. Epub 2023 Jun 
21.

Effects of heterologous human tau protein expression in yeast models of 
proteotoxic stress response.

Zubčić K(1), Franić D(1), Pravica M(1), Hof PR(2), Šimić G(1), Boban M(1).

Author information:
(1)Croatian Institute for Brain Research, University of Zagreb School of 
Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia.
(2)Nash Family Department of Neuroscience, Ronald M. Loeb Center for Alzheimer's 
Disease, Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, New York, USA.

BACKGROUND: The primary histological characteristic of Alzheimer's disease is 
the presence of neurofibrillary tangles, which are large aggregates of tau 
protein. Aging is the primary risk factor for the development of Alzheimer's 
disease, however, the underlying causes of tau protein aggregation and toxicity 
are unclear.
AIMS: Here we investigated tau aggregation and toxicity under the conditions of 
compromised protein homeostasis.
METHODS: We used heterologous expression of human tau protein in the unicellular 
eukaryote yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae with evolutionarily conserved protein 
quality control pathways and examined tau-dependent toxicity and aggregation 
using growth assays, fluorescence microscopy, and a split luciferase-based 
reporter NanoBiT.
RESULTS: Tau protein expressed in yeast under mild proteotoxic stress, or in 
mutants with impaired pathways for proteotoxic stress response, did not lead to 
synthetic toxicity or the formation of obvious aggregates. Chronologically old 
cells also did not develop observable tau aggregates. Our examination of tau 
oligomerization in living cells using NanoBiT reporter suggests that tau does 
not form significant levels of oligomers under basal conditions or under mild 
proteotoxic stress.
CONCLUSION: Together our data suggest that human tau protein does not represent 
a major burden to the protein quality control system in yeast cells.

© 2023 The Authors. CNS Neuroscience & Therapeutics published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cns.14304
PMCID: PMC11163194
PMID: 37341072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


27. Mol Neurobiol. 2022 Jun;59(6):3617-3634. doi: 10.1007/s12035-022-02809-3. Epub 
2022 Mar 31.

Tau Toxicity in Neurodegeneration.

Liang SY(1), Wang ZT(2), Tan L(3)(4), Yu JT(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao University, No.5 
Donghai Middle Road, Qingdao, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, College of Medicine and 
Pharmaceutics, Ocean University of China, Qingdao, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao University, No.5 
Donghai Middle Road, Qingdao, China. dr.tanlan@163.com.
(4)Department of Neurology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, College of Medicine and 
Pharmaceutics, Ocean University of China, Qingdao, China. dr.tanlan@163.com.
(5)Department of Neurology and Institute of Neurology, Huashan Hospital, State 
Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology and MOE Frontiers Center for Brain 
Science, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, 12th Wulumuqi Zhong Road, 
Shanghai, 200040, China. jintai_yu@fudan.edu.cn.

Tau is a microtubule-associated protein widely distributed in the central 
nervous system (CNS). The main function of tau is to promote the assembly of 
microtubules and stabilize their structure. After a long period of research on 
neurodegenerative diseases, the function and dysfunction of the 
microtubule-associated protein tau in neurodegenerative diseases and tau 
neurotoxicity have attracted increasing attention. Tauopathies are a series of 
progressive neurodegenerative diseases caused by pathological changes in tau, 
such as abnormal phosphorylation. The pathological features of tauopathies are 
the deposition of abnormally phosphorylated tau proteins and the aggregation of 
tau proteins in neurons. This article first describes the normal physiological 
function and dysfunction of tau proteins and then discusses the enzymes and 
proteins involved in tau phosphorylation and dephosphorylation, the role of tau 
in cell dysfunction, and the relationships between tau and several 
neurodegenerative diseases. The study of tau neurotoxicity provides new 
directions for the treatment of tauopathies.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12035-022-02809-3
PMID: 35359226 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Gen Physiol Biophys. 2021 Nov;40(6):479-493. doi: 10.4149/gpb_2021031.

The structure of the unstructured: mosaic of tau protein linear motifs obtained 
by high-resolution techniques and molecular simulation.

Cehlar O(1), Bagarova O, Hornakova L, Skrabana R.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuroimmunology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, 
Slovakia.

Intrinsically disordered proteins are flexible molecules with important 
physiological functions. Their mode of action often involves short segments, 
called linear motifs, which may exhibit distinct structural propensities. Tau is 
intrinsically disordered, microtubule-associated protein involved in the 
pathogenesis of various tauopathies. In this review we analyze the collection of 
3D structures of tau local linear motifs gained from the deposited structures of 
tau complexes with various binding partners as well as of tau-tau complexes; 
determined by X-ray and electron crystallography, single-particle electron 
microscopy, NMR spectroscopy and molecular dynamics simulations. Insights into 
the partially stabilized conformations of tau linear motifs are valuable for 
understanding the physiological and pathological processes involving tau 
protein.

DOI: 10.4149/gpb_2021031
PMID: 34897022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Biol Chem. 2019 Aug 23;294(34):12754-12765. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.009487. 
Epub 2019 Jul 4.

Humanization of the entire murine Mapt gene provides a murine model of 
pathological human tau propagation.

Saito T(1)(2), Mihira N(3), Matsuba Y(3), Sasaguri H(3), Hashimoto S(3), 
Narasimhan S(4), Zhang B(4), Murayama S(5), Higuchi M(6), Lee VMY(4), 
Trojanowski JQ(4), Saido TC(7).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Proteolytic Neuroscience, RIKEN Center for Brain Science, 2-1 
Hirosawa, Wako-city, Saitama 351-0198, Japan takashi.saito.aa@riken.jp.
(2)Department of Neuroscience and Pathobiology, Research Institute of 
Environmental Medicine, Nagoya University, Nagoya, Aichi 464-8601, Japan.
(3)Laboratory for Proteolytic Neuroscience, RIKEN Center for Brain Science, 2-1 
Hirosawa, Wako-city, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.
(4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Institute on Aging and 
Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, University of Pennsylvania School 
of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104.
(5)Department of Neuropathology, Tokyo Metropolitan Geriatric Hospital, 35-2 
Sakaecho, Itabashi, Tokyo 173-0015, Japan.
(6)Department of Functional Brain Imaging Research, National Institute of 
Radiological Sciences, National Institutes for Quantum and Radiological Science 
and Technology, Chiba 263-8555, Japan.
(7)Laboratory for Proteolytic Neuroscience, RIKEN Center for Brain Science, 2-1 
Hirosawa, Wako-city, Saitama 351-0198, Japan saido@brain.riken.jp.

In cortical regions of brains from individuals with preclinical or clinical 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), extracellular β-amyloid (Aβ) deposition precedes the 
aggregation of pathological intracellular tau (the product of the gene 
microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT)). To our knowledge, current mouse 
models of tauopathy reconstitute tau pathology by overexpressing mutant human 
tau protein. Here, through a homologous recombination approach that replaced the 
entire murine Mapt gene with the human ortholog, we developed knock-in mice with 
humanized Mapt to create an in vivo platform for studying human tauopathy. Of 
note, the humanized Mapt expressed all six tau isoforms present in humans. We 
next cross-bred the MAPT knock-in mice with single amyloid precursor protein 
(App) knock-in mice to investigate the Aβ-tau axis in AD etiology. The 
double-knock-in mice exhibited higher tau phosphorylation than did single MAPT 
knock-in mice but initially lacked apparent tauopathy and neurodegeneration, as 
observed in the single App knock-in mice. We further observed that tau 
humanization significantly accelerates cell-to-cell propagation of AD 
brain-derived pathological tau both in the absence and presence of 
Aβ-amyloidosis. In the presence of Aβ-amyloidosis, tau accumulation was 
intensified and closely associated with dystrophic neurites, consistently 
showing that Aβ-amyloidosis affects tau pathology. Our results also indicated 
that the pathological human tau interacts better with human tau than with murine 
tau, suggesting species-specific differences between these orthologous 
pathogenic proteins. We propose that the MAPT knock-in mice will make it 
feasible to investigate the behaviors and characteristics of human tau in an 
animal model.

© 2019 Saito et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.009487
PMCID: PMC6709628
PMID: 31273083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: T. S., Y. M., S. H., and T. C. S. serve as 
advisor, director, researcher, and CEO, respectively, for RIKEN BIO Co. Ltd., 
which sublicenses animal models, App KI mice, to for-profit organizations, the 
proceeds from which are used for the identification of disease biomarkers


30. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2011 Sep;68(3):553-7. doi: 
10.1007/s00280-011-1696-7. Epub 2011 Jun 29.

The role of Tau protein in resistance to paclitaxel.

Smoter M(1), Bodnar L, Duchnowska R, Stec R, Grala B, Szczylik C.

Author information:
(1)Klinika Onkologii Kobiet, Wojskowy Instytut Medyczny, Ul. Szaserów 128, 
Warszawa, Poland. smoterm@wp.pl

Resistance to taxanes, related to limited efficacy of systemic therapy in cancer 
patients, is multifactorial. Among mechanisms of resistance to taxanes, those 
related to microtubule-associated proteins (MAP), including protein Tau, are of 
great importance. Protein Tau (50-64 kD) binds to beta-tubulin in the same place 
as paclitaxel. In preclinical studies, low expression of Tau in cancer cells was 
associated with increased sensitivity to paclitaxel. High expression of Tau 
protein in ER-positive breast cancers indicates resistance to taxane-containing 
chemotherapy and sensitivity to hormonal treatment. This article reviews current 
knowledge on predictive value of protein Tau in response to taxanes. Better 
understanding of its role may facilitate patients selection to this sort of 
treatment and lead to treatment optimization.

DOI: 10.1007/s00280-011-1696-7
PMCID: PMC3162141
PMID: 21713447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Alzheimers Dis. 2008 Aug;14(4):401-9. doi: 10.3233/jad-2008-14407.

Truncation of tau protein and its pathological significance in Alzheimer's 
disease.

García-Sierra F(1), Mondragón-Rodríguez S, Basurto-Islas G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Center of Research and Advanced Studies of the 
National Politechnical Institute, Mexico City, Mexico. 
fgarcia-sierra@cell.cinvestav.mx

Abnormal posttranslational modifications of tau protein lead it to aggregate 
into paired helical filaments in Alzheimer's disease (AD). The mechanisms 
involved in the early pathological processing of tau and the induction of a 
polymeric state seem to progress through a sequential pattern of changes mainly 
involving abnormal phosphorylation, conformational changes and truncation. While 
proteolytic cleavage of tau protein during the progression of AD has not been 
comprehensively analyzed, tau is a substrate for several intracellular 
proteases. Furthermore, abnormal regulation of proteolytic events, including 
those associated with apoptosis, may generate truncated tau subproducts which in 
turn may be toxic to neurons per se and capable of polymerization at a faster 
rate. Accumulation of tau fibrils has long been controversial, with much debate 
concerning the true toxicity of polymerized tau. The development of different 
transgenic mice overexpressing tau protein, the generation of cell models 
expressing tau, and the in vitro polymerization paradigms have significantly 
enhanced our understanding of the biophysics and pathological properties of tau 
polymers in AD, as well as in other tau pathologies. This review will discuss 
the pathological role of truncated tau protein in the context of toxicity and 
neurofibrillary tangle formation and maturation and its significance in clinical 
dementia.

DOI: 10.3233/jad-2008-14407
PMID: 18688090 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Biochemistry (Mosc). 2015 Dec;80(13):1800-19. doi: 10.1134/S000629791513012X.

Beta-Amyloid and Tau-Protein: Structure, Interaction, and Prion-Like Properties.

Tatarnikova OG(1), Orlov MA, Bobkova NV.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cell Biophysics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Pushchino, Moscow 
Region, 142290, Russia. nbobkova@mail.ru.

During the last twenty years, molecular genetic investigations of Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) have significantly broadened our knowledge of basic mechanisms of 
this disorder. However, still no unambiguous concept on the molecular bases of 
AD pathogenesis has been elaborated, which significantly impedes the development 
of AD therapy. In this review, we analyze issues concerning processes of 
generation of two proteins (β-amyloid peptide and Tau-protein) in the cell, 
which are believed to play the key role in AD genesis. Until recently, these 
agents were considered independently of each other, but in light of the latest 
studies, it becomes clear that it is necessary to study their interaction and 
combined effects. Studies of mechanisms of toxic action of these endogenous 
compounds, beginning from their interaction with known receptors of main 
neurotransmitters to specific peculiarities of functioning of signal 
intracellular pathways upon development of this pathology, open the way to 
development of new pharmaceutical substances directed concurrently on key 
mechanisms of interaction of toxic proteins inside the cell and on the pathways 
of their propagation in the extracellular space.

DOI: 10.1134/S000629791513012X
PMID: 26878581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Curr Alzheimer Res. 2004 May;1(2):97-101. doi: 10.2174/1567205043332207.

Assembly in vitro of tau protein and its implications in Alzheimer's disease.

Avila J(1), Pérez M, Lucas JJ, Gómez-Ramos A, Santa María I, Moreno F, Smith M, 
Perry G, Hernández F.

Author information:
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular "Severo Ochoa", Facultad de Ciencias, Campus de 
Cantoblanco, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, 28049 - Madrid, Spain. 
javila@cbm.uam.es

Tau is a microtubule associated protein that is also the main component of the 
aberrant filaments that form aberrant structures like the neuropil threads or 
the neurofibrillary tangles, found in the brain of Alzheimer's disease patients. 
The assembly of tau aberrant filaments could be reproduced in vitro by using a 
high concentration of tau protein or, at lower protein concentrations, by adding 
some compounds like polyanions, fatty acids (and derivates), and others. In this 
mini-review a descriptive analysis of the different conditions needed for in 
vitro tau polymerization are summarized.

DOI: 10.2174/1567205043332207
PMID: 15975073 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2012 Jul;2(7):a006247. doi: 
10.1101/cshperspect.a006247.

Biochemistry and cell biology of tau protein in neurofibrillary degeneration.

Mandelkow EM(1), Mandelkow E.

Author information:
(1)Max-Planck Unit for Structural Molecular Biology, c/o DESY, 22607 Hamburg, 
Germany; DZNE, German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, and CAESAR Research 
Center, 53175 Bonn, Germany. mandelkow@mpasmb.desy.de

Tau represents the subunit protein of one of the major hallmarks of Alzheimer 
disease (AD), the neurofibrillary tangles, and is therefore of major interest as 
an indicator of disease mechanisms. Many of the unusual properties of Tau can be 
explained by its nature as a natively unfolded protein. Examples are the large 
number of structural conformations and biochemical modifications 
(phosphorylation, proteolysis, glycosylation, and others), the multitude of 
interaction partners (mainly microtubules, but also other cytoskeletal proteins, 
kinases, and phosphatases, motor proteins, chaperones, and membrane proteins). 
The pathological aggregation of Tau is counterintuitive, given its high 
solubility, but can be rationalized by short hydrophobic motifs forming β 
structures. The aggregation of Tau is toxic in cell and animal models, but can 
be reversed by suppressing expression or by aggregation inhibitors. This review 
summarizes some of the structural, biochemical, and cell biological properties 
of Tau and Tau fibers. Further aspects of Tau as a diagnostic marker and 
therapeutic target, its involvement in other Tau-based diseases, and its 
histopathology are covered by other chapters in this volume.

DOI: 10.1101/cshperspect.a006247
PMCID: PMC3385935
PMID: 22762014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Biochem Soc Trans. 1995 Feb;23(1):80-5. doi: 10.1042/bst0230080.

Tau protein in Alzheimer's disease.

Goedert M(1), Jakes R, Spillantini MG, Crowther RA, Cohen P, Vanmechelen E, 
Probst A, Götz J, Bürki K.

Author information:
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, U.K.

DOI: 10.1042/bst0230080
PMID: 7758799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Int J Biol Macromol. 2021 May 1;178:381-393. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2021.02.210. Epub 2021 Mar 1.

Fisetin inhibits tau aggregation by interacting with the protein and preventing 
the formation of β-strands.

Xiao S(1), Lu Y(2), Wu Q(2), Yang J(2), Chen J(2), Zhong S(2), Eliezer D(3), Tan 
Q(4), Wu C(5).

Author information:
(1)Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Marine Biotechnology and Ecology, College of Life 
Sciences and Oceanography, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518060, 
China; Shenzhen-Hong Kong Institute of Brain Science-Shenzhen Fundamental 
Research Institutions, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518055, China.
(2)Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Marine Biotechnology and Ecology, College of Life 
Sciences and Oceanography, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518060, 
China.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 
10065, USA.
(4)Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Marine Biotechnology and Ecology, College of Life 
Sciences and Oceanography, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518060, 
China. Electronic address: tanqiulong@qq.com.
(5)Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Marine Biotechnology and Ecology, College of Life 
Sciences and Oceanography, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518060, 
China. Electronic address: chengchenwu2020@szu.edu.cn.

Alzheimer's disease is a neurodegenerative disease which severely impacts the 
health of the elderly. Current treatments are only able to alleviate symptoms, 
but not prevent or cure the disease. The neurofibrillary tangles formed by tau 
protein aggregation are one of the defining characteristics of Alzheimer's 
disease, so tau protein has become a key target for the drug design. In this 
study, we show that fisetin, a plant-derived polyphenol compound, can inhibit 
aggregation of the tau fragment, K18, and can disaggregate tau K18 filaments in 
vitro. Meanwhile it is able to prevent the formation of tau aggregates in cells. 
Both experimental and computational studies indicate that fisetin could directly 
interact with tau K18 protein. The binding is mainly created by hydrogen bond 
and van der Waal force, prevents the formation of β-strands at the two 
hexapeptide motifs, and does not perturb the secondary structure or the tubulin 
binding ability of tau protein. In summary, fisetin might be a candidate for 
further development as a potential preventive or therapeutic drug for 
Alzheimer's disease.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2021.02.210
PMCID: PMC9022726
PMID: 33662414 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare no conflicts of interest in regards to this manuscript.


37. Biochim Biophys Acta Gen Subj. 2020 Jul;1864(7):129569. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbagen.2020.129569. Epub 2020 Feb 27.

Modulation of tau protein aggregation using 'Trojan' sequences.

Pandey G(1), Morla S(1), Kumar S(1), Ramakrishnan V(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology 
Guwahati, Guwahati 781039, India.
(2)Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology 
Guwahati, Guwahati 781039, India. Electronic address: vibin@iitg.ernet.in.

BACKGROUND: The abnormal assembly of tau into neurofibrillary tangles has been 
associated with over 30 debilitating disorders known as tauopathies. Tauopathies 
affect millions of people worldwide, yet no clinically approved solution for tau 
aggregation is currently available.
METHODS: We employed a structure-based design approach to make a series of short 
peptide-based perturbants (Trojans), that can interact with the core hydrophobic 
fragment of tau protein. Through a combination of various biophysical methods, 
serum stability, toxicity, and blood-brain barrier translocation assays, we have 
assessed the efficacy of these designed peptides to intervene the aggregation of 
tau protein fragment.
RESULTS: Our observations suggest that Trojan peptides could modulate the 
aggregation of the Ac-VQIVYK-NH2 peptide by either accelerating or arresting its 
self-assembly and reduce the neurotoxicity of the fibrils formed. The designed 
perturbant peptides showed three essential pre-requisites such as negligible 
cytotoxicity, high proteolytic stability in serum, and an ability to cross human 
blood-brain barrier (BBB). Furthermore, the Trojans could disassemble the 
pre-formed fibrillar assemblies.
CONCLUSIONS: These designed Trojan peptides can serve as a potential therapeutic 
option for tauopathies, modulating post as well as pre-aggregation leading to 
the diseases condition.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: Tauopathies are a group of over 20 progressive 
neurodegenerative disorders that affect millions of people worldwide. The 
available therapies of tau-linked neurodegenerative syndromes are limited and 
mostly symptomatic and therefore there is an urgent need for a cost-effective 
treatment option. We are presenting a series of structure-based, de novo 
designed, short peptides that can potentially modulate tau protein aggregation.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2020.129569
PMID: 32114026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


38. Chem Soc Rev. 2018 Apr 3;47(7):2249-2265. doi: 10.1039/c7cs00706j.

Shedding light on tau protein aggregation: the progress in developing highly 
selective fluorophores.

Verwilst P (1), Kim HS , Kim S , Kang C , Kim JS .

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Korea University, Seoul 02841, Korea. 
jongskim@korea.ac.kr.

Historically, in Alzheimer's disease research, a lot of attention has been paid 
to the development of highly selective fluorophores for beta amyloid plaques. 
With a shift in the understanding of the disease and the importance of a network 
of cross-talk interactions, the development of small-molecule fluorescent dyes 
with high selectivity for (hyperphosphorylated) tau protein aggregates in 
neurofibrillary tangles has been gaining increasing attention. Fluorescent dyes 
for the selective labelling of tau aggregates in histological AD brain sections 
have been described, spanning the entire visible range of the electromagnetic 
spectrum. Despite the relatively early stages of the development of the field, a 
large diversity in probe architectures has been reported. Importantly, a handful 
of near-infrared-emissive dyes have been described as well, and some of these 
have exhibited good pharmacological profiles, with a significant 
blood-brain-barrier permeability, and a demonstrated ability to label tau 
tangles in vivo in small-animal models of Alzheimer's disease and other 
tauopathies. The developments summarized in the current work are expected to aid 
the unravelling of the diverse set of players in the etiology of Alzheimer's 
disease. In this tutorial review, we seek to provide the reader with an overview 
of the most important recent developments and hope to provide some guidelines 
for the design of future probes.

DOI: 10.1039/c7cs00706j
PMID: 29484335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2019;1184:407-416. doi: 10.1007/978-981-32-9358-8_30.

Dementia Therapy Targeting Tau.

Buee L(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Lille, INSERM, CHU-Lille, Alzheimer & Tauopathies, LabEx 
DISTALZ, Lille, France. luc.buee@inserm.fr.

Tau is a microtubule-associated tau proteins but it has also non-microtubular 
functions. It aggregates in Alzheimer's disease and many neurodegenerative 
disorders referred to as tauopathies. Such aggregation may result from mutations 
on the tau gene, MAPT, dysregulation in alternative splicing, post-translational 
modifications or truncation. This final chapter addresses some of the various 
researches on a therapeutic potential around the tau protein and its gene, MAPT. 
Many therapeutic strategies are ongoing but they are hampered by the lack of 
knowledge on tau physiological functions.

DOI: 10.1007/978-981-32-9358-8_30
PMID: 32096053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


40. FEBS Lett. 2018 Jul;592(14):2383-2391. doi: 10.1002/1873-3468.13108. Epub 2018 
Jul 6.

Tau filaments in neurodegenerative diseases.

Goedert M(1).

Author information:
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK.

The ordered assembly of Tau protein into abnormal filamentous inclusions is a 
defining characteristic of many human neurodegenerative diseases. Thirty years 
ago, we reported that Tau is an integral component of the intraneuronal 
filaments of Alzheimer's disease. All six brain Tau isoforms make up those 
filaments. Twenty years ago, we and others showed that mutations in MAPT, the 
Tau gene, cause familial forms of frontotemporal dementia, thus proving that 
dysfunction of Tau protein is sufficient to cause neurodegeneration and 
dementia. More recently, we showed that high-resolution structures of Tau 
filaments from human brain can be determined by electron cryo-microscopy. These 
filaments may form the seeds that underlie the prion-like properties of 
aggregated tau.

© 2018 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1002/1873-3468.13108
PMID: 29790176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Alzheimers Dis. 2008 Oct;15(2):169-79. doi: 10.3233/jad-2008-15203.

Chaperone-like antibodies targeting misfolded tau protein: new vistas in the 
immunotherapy of neurodegenerative foldopathies.

Zilka N(1), Kontsekova E, Novak M.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuroimmunology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, AD Centre, 
Bratislava, Slovak Republic.

Neurodegenerative foldopathies are characterized by aberrant folding of proteins 
leading to the intracellular and extracellular accumulation of insoluble 
misfolded proteins. One of the most prominent protein folding disorders is 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). In AD, there were identified two major driving forces 
behind neurodegeneration, misfolded proteins tau and amyloid-beta. Tau belongs 
to a family of intrinsically disordered proteins that are characterized by the 
absence of a rigid three-dimensional structure in their natural environment. 
However, in disease condition, tau truncation and hyperphosphorylation could 
lead to tau transformation from intrinsically disordered protein into highly 
ordered soluble and insoluble misfolded structures. Increased understanding of 
the molecular mechanism underlying pathological transformation of tau protein 
has opened up the possibility of targeting misfolded tau for therapeutic 
purposes. Pharmacological research has identified several therapeutic approaches 
targeting directly or indirectly tau cascade. Novel promising field of AD 
treatment represent monoclonal antibodies with chaperon like activities that 
will be able to neutralize the toxic gain of function of misfolded tau and thus 
increase its degradation. We suggest that chaperon like antibodies targeting 
disease modified tau may hold promise for the successful treatment of AD and 
related foldopathies.

DOI: 10.3233/jad-2008-15203
PMID: 18953106 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Mol Neurosci. 2019 Aug;68(4):620-630. doi: 10.1007/s12031-019-01325-9. Epub 
2019 May 6.

14-3-3/Tau Interaction and Tau Amyloidogenesis.

Chen Y(1)(2)(3), Chen X(1)(2)(3), Yao Z(1)(2)(3), Shi Y(1)(2)(3), Xiong 
J(1)(2)(3), Zhou J(1)(2)(3), Su Z(4)(5)(6)(7), Huang Y(8)(9)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Fermentation Engineering (Ministry of Education), Hubei 
University of Technology, Wuhan, China.
(2)Hubei Key Laboratory of Industrial Microbiology, Hubei University of 
Technology, Wuhan, China.
(3)Hubei Collaborative Innovation Center for Industrial Fermentation, Hubei 
University of Technology, Wuhan, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Fermentation Engineering (Ministry of Education), Hubei 
University of Technology, Wuhan, China. zhengding.su@hbut.edu.cn.
(5)Hubei Key Laboratory of Industrial Microbiology, Hubei University of 
Technology, Wuhan, China. zhengding.su@hbut.edu.cn.
(6)Hubei Collaborative Innovation Center for Industrial Fermentation, Hubei 
University of Technology, Wuhan, China. zhengding.su@hbut.edu.cn.
(7)Department of Biological Engineering, Hubei University of Technology, Wuhan, 
430068, Hubei, China. zhengding.su@hbut.edu.cn.
(8)Key Laboratory of Fermentation Engineering (Ministry of Education), Hubei 
University of Technology, Wuhan, China. yqhuang@hbut.edu.cn.
(9)Hubei Key Laboratory of Industrial Microbiology, Hubei University of 
Technology, Wuhan, China. yqhuang@hbut.edu.cn.
(10)Hubei Collaborative Innovation Center for Industrial Fermentation, Hubei 
University of Technology, Wuhan, China. yqhuang@hbut.edu.cn.
(11)Department of Biological Engineering, Hubei University of Technology, Wuhan, 
430068, Hubei, China. yqhuang@hbut.edu.cn.

The major function of microtubule-associated protein tau is to promote 
microtubule assembly in the central nervous system. However, aggregation of 
abnormally phosphorylated tau is a hallmark of tauopathies. Although the 
molecular mechanisms of conformational transitions and assembling of tau 
molecules into amyloid fibril remain largely unknown, several factors have been 
shown to promote tau aggregation, including mutations, polyanions, 
phosphorylation, and interactions with other proteins. 14-3-3 proteins are a 
family of highly conserved, multifunctional proteins that are mainly expressed 
in the central nervous system. Being a scaffolding protein, 14-3-3 proteins 
interact with tau and regulate tau phosphorylation by bridging tau with various 
protein kinases. 14-3-3 proteins also directly regulate tau aggregation via 
specific and non-specific interactions with tau. In this review, we summarize 
recent advances in characterization of tau conformation and tau/14-3-3 
interaction. We discuss the connection between 14-3-3 binding and tau 
aggregation with a special emphasis on the regulatory role of 14-3-3 on tau 
conformation.

DOI: 10.1007/s12031-019-01325-9
PMID: 31062171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Jun 20;21(12):4400. doi: 10.3390/ijms21124400.

Semisynthetic Modification of Tau Protein with Di-Ubiquitin Chains for 
Aggregation Studies.

Munari F(1), Barracchia CG(1), Parolini F(1), Tira R(1), Bubacco L(2), Assfalg 
M(1), D'Onofrio M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, University of Verona, 37128 Verona, Italy.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Padova, 35121 Padova, Italy.

Ubiquitin, a protein modifier that regulates diverse essential cellular 
processes, is also a component of the protein inclusions characteristic of many 
neurodegenerative disorders. In Alzheimer's disease, the microtubule associated 
tau protein accumulates within damaged neurons in the form of cross-beta 
structured filaments. Both mono- and polyubiquitin were found linked to several 
lysine residues belonging to the region of tau protein that forms the structured 
core of the filaments. Thus, besides priming the substrate protein for 
proteasomal degradation, ubiquitin could also contribute to the assembly and 
stabilization of tau protein filaments. To advance our understanding of the 
impact of ubiquitination on tau protein aggregation and function, we applied 
disulfide-coupling chemistry to modify tau protein at position 353 with Lys48- 
or Lys63-linked di-ubiquitin, two representative polyubiquitin chains that 
differ in topology and structure. Aggregation kinetics experiments performed on 
these conjugates reveal that di-ubiquitination retards filament formation and 
perturbs the fibril elongation rate more than mono-ubiquitination. We further 
show that di-ubiquitination modulates tau-mediated microtubule assembly. The 
effects on tau protein aggregation and microtubule polymerization are 
essentially independent from polyubiquitin chain topology. Altogether, our 
findings provide novel insight into the consequences of ubiquitination on the 
functional activity and disease-related behavior of tau protein.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21124400
PMCID: PMC7352214
PMID: 32575755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.


44. Bratisl Lek Listy. 2006;107(9-10):354-8.

Intrinsically disordered tau protein in Alzheimer's tangles: a coincidence or a 
rule?

Skrabana R(1), Skrabanova M, Csokova N, Sevcik J, Novak M.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuroinmmunology AD Centre, Slovak Academy of Sciences, 
Bratislava, Slovakia.

Tau protein, the major constituent of neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) and related tauopathies, is classified as intrinsically disordered 
protein (IDP). IDPs in contrast to globular proteins contain high proportion of 
polar and charged amino acids in their sequence, which results in the absence of 
a well-defined three-dimensional structure of the free protein. Structural 
flexibility of IDPs is required to perform their important role in many cellular 
processes. In the course of tauopathies, highly soluble disordered tau protein 
acquires rigid fold and forms highly insoluble filaments. Beneficial intrinsic 
disorder transforms into a fatal order: is it a coincidence, or is there an 
underlying reason for preferential IDPs assembly? In this review we present the 
structural characteristics of tau protein filamentous lesions in AD and discuss 
the tendency of IDPs to assembly and to form amyloid deposits (Ref: 65).

PMID: 17262987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Cell Sci Suppl. 1991;15:69-74. doi: 10.1242/jcs.1991.supplement_15.10.

Tau protein and the establishment of an axonal morphology.

Kosik KS(1), Caceres A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine (Division of Neurology), Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Boston, MA.

Dissociated neuronal cultures from several regions of the nervous system 
elaborate two populations of neurites which have features of axons and 
dendrites. The microtubule-associated protein tau appears to segregate to the 
axon in some of these culture systems, however it does not do so until after the 
development of morphological polarity. Despite this observation, tau very likely 
has some role in the development of polarity because in cultured cerebellar 
macroneurons taken from the rat embryonic day 15 primordial cerebellum, the 
inhibition of tau expression by antisense techniques resulted in the failure of 
a single minor neurite to elongate and form an axon-like neurite. Tau antisense 
given continuously for up to 72 h kept neurons locked in a stage with minor 
neurites only; however when released from the effects of the antisense they 
fully recovered. The administration of tau antisense after the development of 
polarity resulted in the loss of the axon-like neurite, while dendrite-like 
neurites continued to grow. Together these results suggest that dendritic 
differentiation in cerebellar macroneurons requires the prior elaboration of an 
axon-like structure.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.1991.supplement_15.10
PMID: 1668596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Biochem Soc Trans. 2010 Aug;38(4):1006-11. doi: 10.1042/BST0381006.

NMR spectroscopy of the neuronal tau protein: normal function and implication in 
Alzheimer's disease.

Landrieu I(1), Leroy A, Smet-Nocca C, Huvent I, Amniai L, Hamdane M, Sibille N, 
Buée L, Wieruszeski JM, Lippens G.

Author information:
(1)CNRS-UMR 8576 - IFR 147, Lille 1 Science and Technology University, 59655 
Villeneuve d'Ascq Cedex, France. isabelle.landrieu@univ-lille1.fr

NMR spectroscopy was used to explore the different aspects of the normal and 
pathological functions of tau, but proved challenging because the protein 
contains 441 amino acids and has poor signal dispersion. We have set out to 
dissect the phosphorylation patterns of tau in order to understand better its 
role in the aggregation process and microtubule-binding regulation. Our current 
knowledge on the functional consequences of specific phosphorylations is still 
limited, mainly because producing and assessing quantitatively phosphorylated 
tau samples is far from straightforward, even in vitro. We use NMR spectroscopy 
as a proteomics tool to characterize the phosphorylation patterns of tau, after 
in vitro phosphorylation by recombinant kinases. The phosphorylated tau can next 
be use for functional assays or interaction assays with phospho-dependent 
protein partners, such as the prolyl cis-trans isomerase Pin1.

DOI: 10.1042/BST0381006
PMID: 20658994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2005 Jun;112(6):813-38. doi: 
10.1007/s00702-004-0221-0. Epub 2004 Oct 27.

Post-translational modifications of tau protein in Alzheimer's disease.

Gong CX(1), Liu F, Grundke-Iqbal I, Iqbal K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurochemistry, New York State Institute for Basic Research in 
Developmental Disabilities, Staten Island, NY 10314, USA. cxgong@ultinet.net

Microtubule-associated protein tau undergoes several post-translational 
modifications and aggregates into paired helical filaments (PHFs) in Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) and other tauopathies. These modifications of tau include 
hyperphosphorylation, glycosylation, ubiquitination, glycation, polyamination, 
nitration, and proteolysis. Hyperphosphorylation and glycosylation are crucial 
to the molecular pathogenesis of neurofibrillary degeneration of AD. The others 
appear to represent failed mechanisms for neurons to remove damaged, misfolded, 
and aggregated proteins. This review summarizes the abnormal post-translational 
modifications of tau and discusses the pathophysiological relevance of 
hyperphosphorylation and glycosylation of tau. Total tau and phosphorylated tau 
levels in cerebrospinal fluid as a diagnostic biomarkers are also reviewed. 
Analyses of the current advances in tau modifications suggest that intervention 
addressing these abnormalities may offer promising therapeutic opportunities to 
prevent and treat neurofibrillary degeneration of AD and other tauopathies.

DOI: 10.1007/s00702-004-0221-0
PMID: 15517432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Neurosci. 2021 Jan 27;41(4):797-810. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1920-20.2020. Epub 
2020 Dec 17.

The Two Cysteines of Tau Protein Are Functionally Distinct and Contribute 
Differentially to Its Pathogenicity in Vivo.

Prifti E(1), Tsakiri EN(1), Vourkou E(1), Stamatakis G(2), Samiotaki M(2), 
Papanikolopoulou K(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Fundamental Biomedical Research.
(2)Institute for Bio-innovation, Biomedical Sciences Research Centre "Alexander 
Fleming," Vari, 16672, Greece.
(3)Institute for Fundamental Biomedical Research papanikolopoulou@fleming.gr.

Although Tau accumulation is clearly linked to pathogenesis in Alzheimer's 
disease and other Tauopathies, the mechanism that initiates the aggregation of 
this highly soluble protein in vivo remains largely unanswered. Interestingly, 
in vitro Tau can be induced to form fibrillar filaments by oxidation of its two 
cysteine residues, generating an intermolecular disulfide bond that promotes 
dimerization and fibrillization. The recently solved structures of Tau filaments 
revealed that the two cysteine residues are not structurally equivalent since 
Cys-322 is incorporated into the core of the fibril, whereas Cys-291 projects 
away from the core to form the fuzzy coat. Here, we examined whether mutation of 
these cysteines to alanine affects differentially Tau mediated toxicity and 
dysfunction in the well-established Drosophila Tauopathy model. Experiments were 
conducted with both sexes, or with either sex. Each cysteine residue contributes 
differentially to Tau stability, phosphorylation status, aggregation propensity, 
resistance to stress, learning, and memory. Importantly, our work uncovers a 
critical role of Cys-322 in determining Tau toxicity and 
dysfunction.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Cysteine-291 and Cysteine-322, the only two 
cysteine residues of Tau present in only 4-Repeat or all isoforms, respectively, 
have competing functions: as the key residues in the catalytic center, they 
enable Tau auto-acetylation; and as residues within the microtubule-binding 
repeat region are important not only for Tau function but also instrumental in 
the initiation of Tau aggregation. In this study, we present the first in vivo 
evidence that their substitution leads to differential consequences on Tau's 
physiological and pathophysiological functions. These differences raise the 
possibility that cysteine residues play a potential role in determining the 
functional diversity between isoforms.

Copyright © 2021 the authors.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1920-20.2020
PMCID: PMC7842753
PMID: 33334867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Biochim Biophys Acta Proteins Proteom. 2019 Oct;1867(10):922-932. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbapap.2019.04.004. Epub 2019 Apr 12.

Mechanistic approaches to understand the prion-like propagation of aggregates of 
the human tau protein.

Kumar H(1), Udgaonkar JB(2).

Author information:
(1)National Centre for Biological Sciences, Tata Institute of Fundamental 
Research, Bengaluru 560065, India.
(2)National Centre for Biological Sciences, Tata Institute of Fundamental 
Research, Bengaluru 560065, India; Indian Institute of Science Education and 
Research, Pune 411008, India. Electronic address: jayant@iiserpune.ac.in.

The dynamic nature of the tau protein under physiological conditions is likely 
to be critical for it to perform its diverse functions inside a cell. Under some 
conditions, this intrinsically disordered protein assembles into pathogenic 
aggregates that are self-perpetuating, toxic and infectious in nature. The role 
of liquid-liquid phase separation in the initiation of the aggregation reaction 
remains to be delineated. Depending on the nature of the aggregate, its 
structure, and its localization, neurodegenerative disorders with diverse 
clinical features are manifested. The prion-like mechanism by which these 
aggregates propagate and spread across the brain is not well understood. Various 
factors (PTMs, mutations) have been strongly associated with the pathological 
aggregates of tau. However, little is known about how these factors modulate the 
pathological properties linked to aggregation. This review describes the current 
progress towards understanding the mechanism of propagation of tau aggregates.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2019.04.004
PMID: 30986567 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Biochem. 2021 Feb 6;169(1):119-134. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvaa101.

Interplay of isoform 1N4R tau protein and amyloid-β peptide fragment 25-35 in 
reducing and non-reducing conditions.

Mohammadi F(1), Takalloo Z(1), Rahmani H(1), Nasiri Khalili MA(2), Khajeh K(1), 
Riazi G(3), H Sajedi R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Tarbiat Modares 
University, Tehran, Jalal AleAhmad Highway, P.O.Box: 14115-111, Iran.
(2)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Malek Ashtar University of 
Technology, Tehran, Lavizan, Babaei Highway, P.O.Box: 15875-1774, Iran.
(3)Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics (IBB), University of Tehran, Tehran, 
Enghelab Square, Postal Code: 1417466191, Iran.

Amyloid-β (Aβ) peptide and tau protein are two hallmark proteins in Alzheimer's 
disease (AD); however, the parameters, which mediate the abnormal aggregation of 
Aβ and tau, have not been fully discovered. Here, we have provided an optimum 
method to purify tau protein isoform 1N4R by using nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid 
agarose chromatography under denaturing condition. The biochemical and 
biophysical properties of the purified protein were further characterized using 
in vitro tau filament assembly, tubulin polymerization assay, circular dichroism 
(CD) spectroscopy and atomic force microscopy. Afterwards, we investigated the 
effect of tau protein on aggregation of Aβ (25-35) peptide using microscopic 
imaging and cell viability assay. Incubation of tau at physiologic and 
supra-physiologic concentrations with Aβ25-35 for 40 days under reducing and 
non-reducing conditions revealed formation of two types of aggregates with 
distinct morphologies and dimensions. In non-reducing condition, the 
co-incubated sample showed granular aggregates, while in reducing condition, 
they formed annular protofibrils. Results from cell viability assay revealed the 
increased cell viability for the co-incubated sample. Therefore, the 
disassembling action shown by tau protein on Aβ25-35 suggests the possibility 
that tau may have a protective role in preventing Aβ peptide from acquiring the 
cytotoxic, aggregated form against oxidative stress damages.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Japanese Biochemical Society. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1093/jb/mvaa101
PMID: 32857841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Biol Chem. 2020 May 1;295(18):5850-5856. doi: 10.1074/jbc.AC120.013166. Epub 
2020 Mar 30.

Zinc promotes liquid-liquid phase separation of tau protein.

Singh V(1), Xu L(1), Boyko S(1), Surewicz K(1), Surewicz WK(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, Ohio 44106.
(2)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, Ohio 44106. Electronic address: witold.surewicz@case.edu.

Tau is a microtubule-associated protein that plays a major role in Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) and other tauopathies. Recent reports indicate that, in the 
presence of crowding agents, tau can undergo liquid-liquid phase separation 
(LLPS), forming highly dynamic liquid droplets. Here, using recombinantly 
expressed proteins, turbidimetry, fluorescence microscopy imaging, and 
fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) assays, we show that the 
divalent transition metal zinc strongly promotes this process, shifting the 
equilibrium phase boundary to lower protein or crowding agent concentrations. We 
observed no tau LLPS-promoting effect for any other divalent transition metal 
ions tested, including Mn2+, Fe2+, Co2+, Ni2+, and Cu2+ We also demonstrate that 
multiple zinc-binding sites on tau are involved in the LLPS-promoting effect and 
provide insights into the mechanism of this process. Zinc concentration is 
highly elevated in AD brains, and this metal ion is believed to be an important 
player in the pathogenesis of this disease. Thus, the present findings bring a 
new dimension to understanding the relationship between zinc homeostasis and the 
pathogenic process in AD and related neurodegenerative disorders.

© 2020 Singh et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.AC120.013166
PMCID: PMC7196643
PMID: 32229582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the contents of this article


52. J Alzheimers Dis. 2019;71(3):979-991. doi: 10.3233/JAD-190604.

Quantification of Tau Protein Lysine Methylation in Aging and Alzheimer's 
Disease.

Huseby CJ(1), Hoffman CN(2), Cooper GL(2), Cocuron JC(3), Alonso AP(3), Thomas 
SN(4), Yang AJ(4), Kuret J(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Interdisciplinary Biophysics Graduate Program, Ohio State University, 
Columbus, OH, USA.
(2)Ohio State Biochemistry Program, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.
(3)BioDiscovery Institute, University of North Texas, Denton, TX, USA.
(4)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology; Molecular & Structural Biology 
Program, Greenebaum Cancer Center, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(5)Department of Biological Chemistry & Pharmacology, Ohio State University, 
Columbus, OH, USA.

Tau is a microtubule-associated protein that normally interacts in monomeric 
form with the neuronal cytoskeleton. In Alzheimer's disease, however, it 
aggregates to form the structural component of neurofibrillary lesions. The 
transformation is controlled in part by age- and disease-associated 
post-translational modifications. Recently we reported that tau isolated from 
cognitively normal human brain was methylated on lysine residues, and that 
high-stoichiometry methylation depressed tau aggregation propensity in vitro. 
However, whether methylation stoichiometry reached levels needed to influence 
aggregation propensity in human brain was unknown. Here we address this problem 
using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry approaches and 
human-derived tau samples. Results revealed that lysine methylation was present 
in soluble tau isolated from cognitively normal elderly cases at multiple sites 
that only partially overlapped with the distributions reported for cognitively 
normal middle aged and AD cohorts, and that the quality of methylation shifted 
from predominantly dimethyl-lysine to monomethyl-lysine with aging and disease. 
However, bulk mol methylation/mol tau stoichiometries never exceeded 1 mol 
methyl group/mol tau protein. We conclude that lysine methylation is a 
physiological post-translational modification of tau protein that changes 
qualitatively with aging and disease, and that pharmacological elevation of tau 
methylation may provide a means for protecting against pathological tau 
aggregation.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-190604
PMCID: PMC6844542
PMID: 31450505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest/Disclosure The authors have 
no conflict of interest to report


53. Sichuan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2023 Sep;54(5):874-883. doi: 
10.12182/20230960501.

[Tau Protein Induces Aberrant Alternative Splicing Changes in PS19 Transgenic 
Mice].

[Article in Chinese]

Tian X(1), Chen C(2), Wang X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China.
(2)Shenzhen Baoan District People's Hospital, Shenzhen 518101, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore through big data analysis whether aberrant alternative 
splicing (AS) events precede tau P301S-induced neurodegenerative phenotype in 
6-month-old PS19 mice.
METHODS: The original sequencing files of the GSE182170 dataset was downloaded 
from the European Nucleotide Archive (ENA) database with axel, aligned to the 
reference genome of the ENSEMBL database by using STAR software, and common AS 
event analysis and visualization were performed with rMATS and rmats2sashimiplot 
R packages. RSEM software was utilized for gene transcript quantification, 
Deseq2, edgeR, and limma R packages were used for differential expression 
analysis, and clusterProfiler R package was applied for GO enrichment analysis. 
String and Cytoscape were used for protein-protein interaction (PPI) analysis. 
Gene expression correlation analysis was performed with ggcorrplot R package. AS 
events were validated using PCR followed by agarose electrophoresis.
RESULTS: A total of 8 079 AS events were identified with rMATS and 117 
significant AS events (ΔPSI>0.1, sequencing coverage >1) were selected 
eventually. The most frequent type of AS event was skipped exon (SE) (50.43%), 
followed by alternative 3' splice site (A3SS) and mutually exclusive exons 
(MXE). GO enrichment analysis revealed that synapse organization genes were 
aberrantly spliced in SE events and spliceosome genes were spliced in A3SS 
events. PPI and correlation analyses showed that the splicing factor Snrpn was 
significantly associated with the largest number of transcripts. Agarose 
electrophoresis confirmed the aberrant AS event of the Lrp8 gene in PS19 mice.
CONCLUSION: Dysregulated splicing factors may contribute to tau P301S-induced 
aberrant AS changes. The study also increases the understanding of the cycling 
of tau protein and splicing factors in tauopathies.

目的: 通过大数据分析6月龄PS19小鼠体内异常选择性剪切（AS）事件是否在tauP301S诱导的神经退行性表型之前出现。
方法: 
采用axel从ENA数据库下载GSE182170数据集原始测序文件，通过STAR软件与ENSEMBL数据库参考基因组进行比对，rMATS和rmats2sashimiplot 
R包进行常见AS事件分析和结果可视化展示。RSEM软件进行基因转录本定量，Deseq2、edgeR、limma 
R包进行差异分析，采用clusterProfiler 
R包对差异基因进行GO富集分析。String和Cytoscape软件用来进行蛋白质间相互作用分析。采用ggcorrplt 
R包进行基因表达相关性分析。PCR结合琼脂糖电泳验证AS事件。
结果: 
通过rMATS鉴定出了8079个AS事件，并最终筛选出117个显著AS事件（ΔPSI>0.1，测序覆盖度>1）。外显子跳跃（SE）是最常见的AS事件（50.43%），其次是外显子3'端可变剪切（A3SS）和外显子互斥（MXE）。GO富集分析发现，突触组织基因发生异常SE事件，而剪切体基因主要发生异常A3SS事件。蛋白相互作用和相关性分析发现Snrpn剪切因子与最多数量的转录本表达显著相关。琼脂糖电泳证实PS19小鼠中Lrp8基因的异常AS事件。
结论: 异常的剪切因子可能参与了tauP301S引起的异常AS改变。本研究扩展了tau蛋白病中tau蛋白循环和剪切因子的知识。

Copyright© by Editorial Board of Journal of Sichuan University (Medical 
Sciences).

DOI: 10.12182/20230960501
PMCID: PMC10579071
PMID: 37866941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: 利益冲突　所有作者均声明不存在利益冲突


54. Int J Biol Macromol. 2024 May;266(Pt 2):130802. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2024.130802. Epub 2024 Mar 15.

Hiding in plain sight: Complex interaction patterns between Tau and 14-3-3ζ 
protein variants.

Crha R(1), Kozeleková A(1), Hofrová A(2), Iľkovičová L(1), Gašparik N(1), 
Kadeřávek P(1), Hritz J(3).

Author information:
(1)Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Kamenice 5, 625 
00 Brno, Czech Republic; National Centre for Biomolecular Research, Faculty of 
Science, Masaryk University, Kamenice 5, 625 00 Brno, Czech Republic.
(2)Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Kamenice 5, 625 
00 Brno, Czech Republic; National Centre for Biomolecular Research, Faculty of 
Science, Masaryk University, Kamenice 5, 625 00 Brno, Czech Republic; Department 
of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Kamenice 5, 625 00 Brno, 
Czech Republic.
(3)Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Kamenice 5, 625 
00 Brno, Czech Republic; Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Masaryk 
University, Kamenice 5, 625 00 Brno, Czech Republic. Electronic address: 
jozef.hritz@ceitec.muni.cz.

Tau protein is an intrinsically disordered protein that plays a key role in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). In brains of AD patients, Tau occurs abnormally 
phosphorylated and aggregated in neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs). Together with 
Tau, 14-3-3 proteins - abundant cytosolic dimeric proteins - were found 
colocalized in the NFTs. However, so far, the molecular mechanism of the process 
leading to pathological changes in Tau structure as well as the direct 
involvement of 14-3-3 proteins are not well understood. Here, we aimed to reveal 
the effects of phosphorylation by protein kinase A (PKA) on Tau structural 
preferences and provide better insight into the interaction between Tau and 
14-3-3 proteins. We also addressed the impact of monomerization-inducing 
phosphorylation of 14-3-3 at S58 on the binding to Tau protein. Using 
multidimensional nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR), chemical 
cross-linking analyzed by mass spectrometry (MS) and PAGE, we unveiled 
differences in their binding affinity, stoichiometry, and interfaces with 
single-residue resolution. We revealed that the interaction between 14-3-3 and 
Tau proteins is mediated not only via the 14-3-3 amphipathic binding grooves, 
but also via less specific interactions with 14-3-3 protein surface and, in the 
case of monomeric 14-3-3, also partially via the exposed dimeric interface. In 
addition, the hyperphosphorylation of Tau changes its affinity to 14-3-3 
proteins. In conclusion, we propose quite complex interaction mode between the 
Tau and 14-3-3 proteins.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2024.130802
PMID: 38492709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest All authors 
declare that there are no conflicts of interest associated with this manuscript.


55. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000 Jul 26;1502(1):122-32. doi: 
10.1016/s0925-4439(00)00038-7.

Structure of tau protein and assembly into paired helical filaments.

Friedhoff P(1), von Bergen M, Mandelkow EM, Mandelkow E.

Author information:
(1)Max-Planck-Unit for Structural Molecular Biology, Hamburg, Germany.

Over the past few years the systematic investigation of paired helical filament 
assembly from tau protein in vitro has become feasible. We review our current 
understanding of the structure and conformations of tau protein and how this 
affects tau's assembly into the pathological paired helical filaments in 
Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.1016/s0925-4439(00)00038-7
PMID: 10899437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Biol Chem. 2018 Mar 9;293(10):3710-3719. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.001784. Epub 
2018 Jan 30.

An N-terminal motif unique to primate tau enables differential protein-protein 
interactions.

Stefanoska K(1), Volkerling A(1), Bertz J(1), Poljak A(2), Ke YD(3), Ittner 
LM(4)(5), Ittner A(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Dementia Research Unit, School of Medical Sciences.
(2)the Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Facility, and.
(3)the Motor Neuron Disease Unit, School of Medical Sciences, The University of 
New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales 2052 and.
(4)From the Dementia Research Unit, School of Medical Sciences, 
l.ittner@unsw.edu.au.
(5)Neuroscience Australia, Sydney, New South Wales 2031, Australia.

Compared with other mammalian species, humans are particularly susceptible to 
tau-mediated neurodegenerative disorders. Differential interactions of the tau 
protein with other proteins are critical for mediating tau's physiological 
functions as well as tau-associated pathological processes. Primate tau harbors 
an 11-amino acid-long motif in its N-terminal region (residues 18-28), which is 
not present in non-primate species and whose function is unknown. Here, we used 
deletion mutagenesis to remove this sequence region from the longest human tau 
isoform, followed by glutathione S-transferase (GST) pulldown assays paired with 
isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) multiplex labeling, 
a quantitative method to measure protein abundance by mass spectrometry. Using 
this method, we found that the primate-specific N-terminal tau motif 
differentially mediates interactions with neuronal proteins. Among these binding 
partners are proteins involved in synaptic transmission (synapsin-1 and 
synaptotagmin-1) and signaling proteins of the 14-3-3 family. Furthermore, we 
identified an interaction of tau with a member of the annexin family (annexin 
A5) that was linked to the 11-residue motif. These results suggest that primate 
Tau has evolved specific residues that differentially regulate protein-protein 
interactions compared with tau proteins from other non-primate mammalian 
species. Our findings provide in vitro insights into tau's interactions with 
other proteins that may be relevant to human disease.

© 2018 Stefanoska et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.001784
PMCID: PMC5846163
PMID: 29382714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the contents of this article


57. J Integr Neurosci. 2023 Oct 23;22(6):145. doi: 10.31083/j.jin2206145.

A Missing Origin of the Tau Protein Aggregation Pathway Triggered by Thermal and 
Biological Forces.

Lu HP(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Photochemical Sciences, Department of Chemistry, Bowling Green 
State University, Bowling Green, OH 43403, USA.

Fluctuations in mechanical force vectors within living cells can substantially 
influence the behavior and functions of proteins. Tau protein can spontaneously 
be raptured and entangled in refolding under picoNewton compressive forces that 
are biologically available in a living cell: a hidden aggregation pathway due to 
stress and crowding. Our findings were achieved through a customized 
modification of atomic force microscopy (AFM) for single-molecule manipulation. 
This previously hidden phenomenon of proteins rupturing collectively while 
subsequently and spontaneously refolding into a complex entangled conformation, 
distinct from the Tau protein's folded or unfolded states, could potentially 
explain the early-event initiation of the aggregation of the Tau protein seen in 
various neurodegenerative diseases. This article introduces our recent discovery 
of the missing Tau protein property that is of significant relevance to the Tau 
protein and neurodegenerative disease research and medical treatment, aiming to 
stimulate the collective observation and a new perspective on the Tau 
aggregation mechanism and disease mechanism studies.

© 2023 The Author(s). Published by IMR Press.

DOI: 10.31083/j.jin2206145
PMID: 38176940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflict of interest.


58. Methods Mol Biol. 2018;1779:447-461. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-7816-8_27.

Tau Assembly into Filaments.

Pérez M(1), Cuadros R(2), Medina M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy, Histology and Neurosciences, Universidad Autónoma de 
Madrid, Arzobispo Morcillo, 4, Madrid, 28029, Spain.
(2)Centro de Biología Molecular "Severo Ochoa" CSIC-UAM, Nicolás Cabrera, 1, 
Madrid, 28049, Spain.
(3)CIBERNED, Queen Sofia Foundation Alzheimer Center, CIEN Foundation, Instituto 
de Salud Carlos III, valderrebollo, 5, Madrid, 28031, Spain. 
mmedina@ciberned.es.

The brain-specific tau protein binds directly through microtubules to regulate 
dynamically its structure and function. It also plays a critical role in the 
pathogenesis of a number of neurodegenerative disorders collectively known as 
tauopathies, the most common of which is Alzheimer's disease (AD). Under 
pathological conditions, the natively unfolded tau protein self-assembles into 
filamentous structures of aggregated, hyperphosphorylated tau. In AD brains, tau 
accumulates in the neuronal perikarya and processes as paired helical filaments 
(PHF) forming the neurofibrillary tangles (NFT) characteristic of the disease. 
Prominent tau neurofibrillary pathology is a common feature in all tauopathies 
and its development is associated with progressive neuronal loss and cognitive 
decline. A precise understanding of the cellular, biochemical, and structural 
mechanisms involved in the process of tau protein aggregation and fibril 
formation is key to design strategies to prevent, slow down, or stop the 
neurodegenerative pathway leading to neuronal loss in AD and other tauopathies. 
Herein, we describe some complementary experimental procedures for PHF 
purification from human postmortem brain, tau expression and purification, as 
well as in vitro formation of tau filaments from purified recombinant tau.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-7816-8_27
PMID: 29886549 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Trends Mol Med. 2015 Jun;21(6):394-402. doi: 10.1016/j.molmed.2015.03.003. Epub 
2015 Apr 3.

Tau immunotherapy for Alzheimer's disease.

Pedersen JT(1), Sigurdsson EM(2).

Author information:
(1)Neurodegeneration, H. Lundbeck A/S, DK-2500 Valby, Denmark. Electronic 
address: jatp@lundbeck.com.
(2)Departments of Neuroscience and Physiology, and Psychiatry, New York 
University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA. Electronic address: 
einar.sigurdsson@nyumc.org.

Targeting pathological tau protein in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and related 
tauopathies has shown great potential in animal models. Given that tau lesions 
correlate better with the degree of dementia than do amyloid-β (Aβ) plaques, 
their clearance may be clinically more efficacious than removing Aβ when 
cognitive deficits become evident in AD. Several complementary mechanisms of 
antibody-mediated removal of tau aggregates are likely to act in concert and the 
importance of each one may depend on antibody properties, the disease, and its 
stage. Clinical trials of tau immunotherapy are already underway and several 
more are likely to be initiated in the near future.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molmed.2015.03.003
PMID: 25846560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Biol Chem. 2016 Apr 1;291(14):7742-53. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.700914. Epub 2016 
Feb 8.

Characterization of Neuronal Tau Protein as a Target of Extracellular 
Signal-regulated Kinase.

Qi H(1), Prabakaran S(2), Cantrelle FX(1), Chambraud B(3), Gunawardena J(2), 
Lippens G(1), Landrieu I(4).

Author information:
(1)From Lille University, CNRS UMR8576, F-59000 Lille, France.
(2)Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 
02115, and.
(3)INSERM UMR1195 Paris SUD University, Le Kremlin Bicêtre 94276, France.
(4)From Lille University, CNRS UMR8576, F-59000 Lille, France, 
isabelle.landrieu@univ-lille1.fr.

Tau neuronal protein has a central role in neurodegeneration and is implicated 
in Alzheimer disease development. Abnormal phosphorylation of Tau impairs its 
interaction with other proteins and is associated with its dysregulation in 
pathological conditions. Molecular mechanisms leading to hyperphosphorylation of 
Tau in pathological conditions are unknown. Here, we characterize 
phosphorylation of Tau by extracellular-regulated kinase (ERK2), a 
mitogen-activated kinase (MAPK) that responds to extracellular signals. Analysis 
ofin vitrophosphorylated Tau by activated recombinant ERK2 with nuclear magnetic 
resonance spectroscopy (NMR) reveals phosphorylation of 15 Ser/Thr sites.In 
vitrophosphorylation of Tau using rat brain extract and subsequent NMR analysis 
identifies the same sites. Phosphorylation with rat brain extract is known to 
transform Tau into an Alzheimer disease-like state. Our results indicate that 
phosphorylation of Tau by ERK2 alone is sufficient to produce the same 
characteristics. We further investigate the mechanism of ERK2 phosphorylation of 
Tau. Kinases are known to recognize their protein substrates not only by their 
specificity for a targeted Ser or Thr phosphorylation site but also by binding 
to linear-peptide motifs called docking sites. We identify two main ERK2 docking 
sites in Tau sequence using NMR. Our results suggest that ERK2 dysregulation in 
Alzheimer disease could lead to abnormal phosphorylation of Tau resulting in the 
pathology of the disease.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M115.700914
PMCID: PMC4817198
PMID: 26858248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Lancet. 2016 Dec 10;388(10062):2842-2844. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)32107-9. 
Epub 2016 Nov 16.

Targeting tau protein in Alzheimer's disease.

Rafii MS(1).

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer's Therapeutic Research Institute, University of Southern 
California, CA, USA; Department of Neuroscience, University of California, San 
Diego, CA 92121, USA. Electronic address: mrafii@usc.edu.

Comment on
    Lancet. 2016 Dec 10;388(10062):2873-2884. doi: 
10.1016/S0140-6736(16)31275-2.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)32107-9
PMID: 27863808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Protein Eng Des Sel. 2018 Dec 1;31(12):447-455. doi: 10.1093/protein/gzz010.

Recombinant production and purification of the human protein Tau.

Ferrari L(1)(2), Rüdiger SGD(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Cellular Protein Chemistry, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research, Utrecht 
University, Padualaan 8, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(2)Science for Life, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Tau protein is a microtubule-stabilising protein whose aggregation is linked to 
Alzheimer's Disease and other forms of dementia. Tau biology is at the heart of 
cytoskeletal dynamics and neurodegenerative mechanisms, making it a crucial 
protein to study. Tau purification, however, is challenging as Tau is 
disordered, which makes it difficult to produce in recombinant system and is 
degradation-prone. It is thus challenging to obtain pure and stable preparations 
of Tau. Here, we present a fast and robust protocol to purify Tau recombinantly 
in Escherichia coli. Our protocol allows purifying Tau either tag-less or 
FLAG-tagged at its N-terminus, and Tau fragments of interest. By exploiting a 
cleavable affinity tag and two anion exchange columns, we obtained Tau 
preparations of high purity, stable and suitable for in vitro studies, including 
aggregation experiments that resemble neurodegenerative processes.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/protein/gzz010
PMID: 31265107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Trends Cell Biol. 1998 Nov;8(11):425-7. doi: 10.1016/s0962-8924(98)01368-3.

Tau in Alzheimer's disease.

Mandelkow EM(1), Mandelkow E.

Author information:
(1)Max-Planck-Unit for Structural Molecular Biology, Hamburg, Germany. 
mand@mpasmb.desy.de

Neurofibrillar protein aggregates containing tau are one of the major hallmarks 
of Alzheimer's disease (AD). In normal cells, tau stabilizes axonal 
microtubules, which are the tracks for intracellular traffic. In AD, tau becomes 
abnormally phosphorylated, aggregates into paired helical filaments and loses 
its ability to maintain the microtubule tracks. There is renewed interest in tau 
as a causative factor in neurodegenerative disease based on recently discovered 
mutations in the gene encoding tau. This article discusses how changes in tau 
protein could lead to retraction of neuronal processes and thus cell death and 
argues that tau pathology, rather than beta-amyloid, might be the most reliable 
indicative factor for AD.

DOI: 10.1016/s0962-8924(98)01368-3
PMID: 9854307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Med Hypotheses. 2020 Feb;135:109476. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2019.109476. Epub 2019 
Nov 11.

Serum and saliva total tau protein as a marker for relapsing-remitting multiple 
sclerosis.

Mirzaii-Dizgah MH(1), Mirzaii-Dizgah MR(2), Mirzaii-Dizgah I(3).

Author information:
(1)Student Research Center, School of Dentistry, Aja University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Student Research Center, Student Research Center, School of Medicine, Iran 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Dept. of Physiology, School of Medicine, Aja University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran. Electronic address: emirzaii@alumnus.tums.ac.ir.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is considered as motor and sensory function loss, which 
results from demyelination and following axonal lesion. Tau protein interferes 
in the construction and stabilization of microtubules that are needed for axonal 
transport. We hypothesize that the level of tau protein alters in MS, so we 
examined the level of total tau protein in serum, stimulated and unstimulated 
saliva as a suitable biomarker for detecting of relapsing-remitting MS. A 
case-control study was carried out in 30 healthy women and 30 who suffer MS and 
were hospitalized in Imam Reza hospital, Tehran, Iran. Total tau protein level 
was assayed in serum and stimulated and unstimulated whole saliva. Total tau 
protein was expressed at a lower level in serum of MS patients compared to 
control groups. The serum total tau protein level negatively correlated with 
EDSS. There was no significant difference in saliva total tau protein between MS 
and healthy individuals. Moreover, there was no significant correlation between 
saliva and serum total tau protein and between saliva total tau protein and 
EDSS. The serum level of tau protein is lower in MS and it may be considered as 
a potential biomarker in Multiple sclerosis. However, it seems that tau protein 
in the saliva isn't a suitable biomarker for detection of MS.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mehy.2019.109476
PMID: 31733529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


65. J Proteome Res. 2024 Nov 1;23(11):5085-5095. doi: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.4c00587. 
Epub 2024 Sep 27.

Pilot Study for Deciphering Post-Translational Modifications and Proteoforms of 
Tau Protein by Capillary Electrophoresis-Mass Spectrometry.

Fang F(1), Xu T(1), Chien Hagar HT(2), Hovde S(2), Kuo MH(2), Sun L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Michigan State University, 578 S Shaw Lane, East 
Lansing, Michigan 48824, United States.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michigan State University, 
603 Wilson Road, Room 401, East Lansing, Michigan 48824, United States.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2024 Jul 08:2024.07.04.602093. doi: 10.1101/2024.07.04.602093.

Abnormal accumulation of tau protein in the brain is one pathological hallmark 
of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Many tau protein post-translational modifications 
(PTMs) are associated with the development of AD, such as phosphorylation, 
acetylation, and methylation. Therefore, a complete picture of the PTM landscape 
of tau is critical for understanding the molecular mechanisms of AD progression. 
Here, we offered a pilot study of combining two complementary analytical 
techniques, capillary zone electrophoresis (CZE)-tandem mass spectrometry 
(MS/MS) and reversed-phase liquid chromatography (RPLC)-MS/MS, for bottom-up 
proteomics of recombinant human tau-0N3R. We identified 50 phosphorylation sites 
of tau-0N3R in total, which is about 25% higher than that from RPLC-MS/MS alone. 
CZE-MS/MS provided more PTM sites (i.e., phosphorylation) and modified peptides 
of tau-0N3R than RPLC-MS/MS, and its predicted electrophoretic mobility helped 
improve the confidence of the identified modified peptides. We developed a 
highly efficient capillary isoelectric focusing (cIEF)-MS technique to offer a 
bird's-eye view of tau-0N3R proteoforms, with 11 putative tau-0N3R proteoforms 
carrying up to nine phosphorylation sites and lower pI values from more 
phosphorylated proteoforms detected. Interestingly, under native-like cIEF-MS 
conditions, we observed three putative tau-0N3R dimers carrying phosphate 
groups. The findings demonstrate that CE-MS is a valuable analytical technique 
for the characterization of tau PTMs, proteoforms, and even oligomerization.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.4c00587
PMCID: PMC11536466
PMID: 39327902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.


66. ACS Chem Neurosci. 2021 Jan 6;12(1):123-132. doi: 10.1021/acschemneuro.0c00617. 
Epub 2020 Dec 15.

Inhibitory Effects of Isobavachalcone on Tau Protein Aggregation, Tau 
Phosphorylation, and Oligomeric Tau-Induced Apoptosis.

Xiao S(1)(2), Wu Q(1), Yao X(1), Zhang J(1), Zhong W(1), Zhao J(1), Liu Q(1), 
Zhang M(1).

Author information:
(1)Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Marine Biotechnology and Ecology, College of Life 
Sciences and Oceanography, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518060, 
China.
(2)Shenzhen Bay Laboratory, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518055, China.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is one of the most common neurodegenerative diseases 
without any effective medicine treatments. The neurofibrillary tangles 
containing hyperphosphorylated tau protein are one important pathological 
characteristic. Thus, one practicable strategy for AD drug design is to discover 
compounds that could inhibit tau protein aggregation and/or phosphorylation. In 
this study, isobavachalcone, a natural plant-derived compound, has been shown to 
inhibit tau protein aggregation and disaggregate tau fibrils in vitro by 
directly interacting with tau protein at amino acids I278, V309, etc. It is able 
to reduce tau phosphorylation at four disease-related sites in vivo by 
regulating the critical kinase and protein phosphatase, GSK3β and PP2A. The 
compound also exhibits protection against tau oligomers-induced apoptosis 
through the mitochondria and ER mediated apoptotic pathways. In summary, 
isobavachalcone is a promising candidate for further evaluation as a potential 
preventive and therapeutic medicine for AD.

DOI: 10.1021/acschemneuro.0c00617
PMID: 33320518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Neurosci. 2011 Feb 2;31(5):1688-92. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2610-10.2011.

Tau protein is required for amyloid {beta}-induced impairment of hippocampal 
long-term potentiation.

Shipton OA(1), Leitz JR, Dworzak J, Acton CE, Tunbridge EM, Denk F, Dawson HN, 
Vitek MP, Wade-Martins R, Paulsen O, Vargas-Caballero M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Anatomy, and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford 
OX1 3PT, United Kingdom.

Amyloid β (Aβ) and tau protein are both implicated in memory impairment, mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI), and early Alzheimer's disease (AD), but whether and 
how they interact is unknown. Consequently, we asked whether tau protein is 
required for the robust phenomenon of Aβ-induced impairment of hippocampal 
long-term potentiation (LTP), a widely accepted cellular model of memory. We 
used wild-type mice and mice with a genetic knock-out of tau protein and 
recorded field potentials in an acute slice preparation. We demonstrate that the 
absence of tau protein prevents Aβ-induced impairment of LTP. Moreover, we show 
that Aβ increases tau phosphorylation and that a specific inhibitor of the tau 
kinase glycogen synthase kinase 3 blocks the increased tau phosphorylation 
induced by Aβ and prevents Aβ-induced impairment of LTP in wild-type mice. 
Together, these findings show that tau protein is required for Aβ to impair 
synaptic plasticity in the hippocampus and suggest that the Aβ-induced 
impairment of LTP is mediated by tau phosphorylation. We conclude that 
preventing the interaction between Aβ and tau could be a promising strategy for 
treating cognitive impairment in MCI and early AD.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2610-10.2011
PMCID: PMC3836238
PMID: 21289177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2015 Aug 24;54(35):10347-51. doi: 
10.1002/anie.201501714. Epub 2015 Jun 19.

Folding of the Tau Protein on Microtubules.

Kadavath H(1)(2)(3), Jaremko M(1)(2)(3), Jaremko Ł(1)(2)(3), Biernat J(4), 
Mandelkow E(4), Zweckstetter M(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Am Fassberg 11, 37077 
Göttingen (Germany).
(2)Deutsches Zentrum für Neurodegenerative Erkrankungen (DZNE), Göttingen 
(Germany).
(3)Center for the Molecular Physiology of the Brain, University Medical Center, 
Göttingen (Germany).
(4)Deutsches Zentrum für Neurodegenerative Erkrankungen (DZNE) & CAESAR Research 
Center, Ludwig-Erhard-Allee 2, Bonn (Germany).
(5)Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Am Fassberg 11, 37077 
Göttingen (Germany). markus.zweckstetter@dzne.de.
(6)Deutsches Zentrum für Neurodegenerative Erkrankungen (DZNE), Göttingen 
(Germany). markus.zweckstetter@dzne.de.
(7)Center for the Molecular Physiology of the Brain, University Medical Center, 
Göttingen (Germany). markus.zweckstetter@dzne.de.

Microtubules are regulated by microtubule-associated proteins. However, little 
is known about the structure of microtubule-associated proteins in complex with 
microtubules. Herein we show that the microtubule-associated protein Tau, which 
is intrinsically disordered in solution, locally folds into a stable structure 
upon binding to microtubules. While Tau is highly flexible in solution and 
adopts a β-sheet structure in amyloid fibrils, in complex with microtubules the 
conserved hexapeptides at the beginning of the Tau repeats two and three convert 
into a hairpin conformation. Thus, binding to microtubules stabilizes a unique 
conformation in Tau.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/anie.201501714
PMID: 26094605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1996 Jan 17;777:96-106. doi: 
10.1111/j.1749-6632.1996.tb34407.x.

Structure, microtubule interactions, and phosphorylation of tau protein.

Mandelkow EM(1), Schweers O, Drewes G, Biernat J, Gustke N, Trinczek B, 
Mandelkow E.

Author information:
(1)Max-Planck-Unit for Structural Molecular Biology, Hamburg, Germany. 
mand@mpasmb.desy.de

This paper summarizes recent structural and functional studies on tau protein, 
its interactions with microtubules, its self-assembly into paired helical 
filaments (PHF)-like fibers, and its modification by phosphorylation. The 
structure of tau in solution resembles that of a random coil. Both tau and 
Alzheimer PHFs have very little secondary structure, making it improbable that 
the assembly of tau into PHFs is based on interacting beta sheets. Tau's binding 
to microtubules can be described by a "jaws" effect. The domain containing the 
repeats binds very weakly, while the flanking regions (jaws) bind strongly, even 
without the repeats. However, only the combination of flanking regions and 
repeats makes binding productive in terms of microtubule nucleation and 
assembly. Although the majority of Alzheimer-like phosphorylation sites are 
outside the repeats they have only a weak influence on binding, whereas the 
phosphorylation at Ser262 inside the repeats inhibits binding and makes 
microtubules dynamically unstable. This site can be phosphorylated by kinases 
present in brain tissue, and it is uniquely phosphorylated in Alzheimer brain.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1996.tb34407.x
PMID: 8624133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Structure. 2024 Oct 3;32(10):1793-1807.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2024.06.018. Epub 
2024 Jul 19.

Intracellular tau fragment droplets serve as seeds for tau fibrils.

Soeda Y(1), Yoshimura H(2), Bannai H(3), Koike R(4), Shiiba I(5), Takashima 
A(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Alzheimer's Disease, Department of Life Science, Faculty of 
Science, Gakushuin University, 1-5-1 Mejiro, Toshima-ku, Tokyo 171-8588, Japan. 
Electronic address: soeday7188@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Chemistry, School of Science, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 
Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.
(3)School of Advanced Science and Engineering, Department of Electrical 
Engineering and Biosciences, Waseda University, 2-2 Wakamatsucho, Shinjuku-Ku, 
Tokyo 162-0056, Japan.
(4)Laboratory for Alzheimer's Disease, Department of Life Science, Faculty of 
Science, Gakushuin University, 1-5-1 Mejiro, Toshima-ku, Tokyo 171-8588, Japan.
(5)Laboratory of Molecular Biochemistry, Department of Life Science, Faculty of 
Science, Gakushuin University, 1-5-1 Mejiro, Toshima-ku, Tokyo 171-8588, Japan.

Intracellular tau aggregation requires a local protein concentration increase, 
referred to as "droplets". However, the cellular mechanism for droplet formation 
is poorly understood. Here, we expressed OptoTau, a P301L mutant tau fused with 
CRY2olig, a light-sensitive protein that can form homo-oligomers. Under blue 
light exposure, OptoTau increased tau phosphorylation and was sequestered in 
aggresomes. Suppressing aggresome formation by nocodazole formed tau granular 
clusters in the cytoplasm. The granular clusters disappeared by discontinuing 
blue light exposure or 1,6-hexanediol treatment suggesting that intracellular 
tau droplet formation requires microtubule collapse. Expressing OptoTau-ΔN, a 
species of N-terminal cleaved tau observed in the Alzheimer's disease brain, 
formed 1,6-hexanediol and detergent-resistant tau clusters in the cytoplasm with 
blue light stimulation. These intracellular stable tau clusters acted as a seed 
for tau fibrils in vitro. These results suggest that tau droplet formation and 
N-terminal cleavage are necessary for neurofibrillary tangles formation in 
neurodegenerative diseases.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2024.06.018
PMID: 39032487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.


71. Acta Virol. 1994 Jun;38(3):173-89.

Truncated tau protein as a new marker for Alzheimer's disease.

Novák M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology and Immunology, Slovak Academy of 
Sciences, Bratislava.

Molecular analysis of histological hallmarks (neurofibrillary tangles, neuritic 
plaques, neuropil threads and dystrophic neurites) of Alzheimer diseased brain 
tissues showed that these lesions contain paired helical filaments. Their major 
constituent is microtubule associated protein tau that is in an abnormally 
hyperphosphorylated and truncated state. These diseased forms of tau protein are 
unable to promote full microtubule assembly. Understanding of the molecular 
basis of the processes leading to the modifications of tau proteins and paired 
helical filament formation will form a firm step toward rational drug 
development and the cure of the Alzheimer's disease.

PMID: 7817900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Mol Neurosci. 2021 Nov;71(11):2179-2191. doi: 10.1007/s12031-020-01776-5. Epub 
2021 Jan 18.

Tau in the Pathophysiology of Parkinson's Disease.

Pan L(1), Meng L(1), He M(1), Zhang Z(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430060, 
China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430060, 
China. Zhentaozhang@whu.edu.cn.

The pathological hallmarks of Parkinson's disease (PD) are the progressive loss 
of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra and the formation of Lewy bodies 
(LBs) in remaining neurons. LBs primarily consist of aggregated α-Synuclein 
(α-Syn). However, accumulating evidence suggests that Tau, which is associated 
with tauopathies such as Alzheimer's disease (AD), progressive supranuclear 
palsy (PSP), and argyrophilic grain disease, is also involved in the 
pathophysiology of PD. A genome-wide association study (GWAS) identified MAPT, 
the gene encoding the Tau protein, as a risk gene for PD. Autopsy of PD patients 
also revealed the colocalization of Tau and α-Syn in LBs. Experimental evidence 
has shown that Tau interacts with α-Syn and influences the pathology of α-Syn in 
PD. In this review, we discuss the structure and function of Tau and provide a 
summary of the current evidence supporting Tau's involvement as either an active 
or passive element in the pathophysiology of PD, which may provide novel targets 
for the early diagnosis and treatment of PD.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12031-020-01776-5
PMCID: PMC8585831
PMID: 33459970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.


73. Protein Pept Lett. 2006;13(3):235-46. doi: 10.2174/092986606775338461.

Studying the natively unfolded neuronal Tau protein by solution NMR 
spectroscopy.

Lippens G(1), Sillen A, Smet C, Wieruszeski JM, Leroy A, Buée L, Landrieu I.

Author information:
(1)CNRS-Université de Lille2 UMR 8525, Institut Pasteur de Lille, 1 rue du 
Professeur Calmette, BP 245, 59019 Lille Cedex France. 
guy.lippens@pasteur-lille.fr

The neuronal Tau protein, whose physiological role is to stabilize the 
microtubules, is found under the form of aggregated filaments and tangles in 
Alzheimer's diseased neurons. Until recently detailed structural analysis of the 
natively unfolded Tau protein has been hindered due to its shear size and 
unfavourable amino acid composition. We review here the recent progress in the 
assignments of the full-length polypeptide using novel methods of product planes 
and peptide NMR mapping, and indicate the structural insights that can be 
obtained from this assignment. Preliminary NMR data on the fibers show that the 
assignment enables a precise mapping of the rigid core. Future NMR experiments 
should allow one to gain more insight into the conformational aspects of this 
intriguing protein.

DOI: 10.2174/092986606775338461
PMID: 16515451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Methods Mol Biol. 2018;1779:85-97. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-7816-8_7.

Preparation of Tau Oligomers After the Protein Extraction from Bacteria and 
Brain Cortices.

Argyrousi EK(1)(2)(3), Staniszewski A(1)(2), Nicholls RE(1)(2), Arancio 
O(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University, New York, NY, 
USA.
(2)The Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain, 
Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Neuropsychology, School for Mental Health and 
Neuroscience (MHeNS), Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University, New York, NY, 
USA. oa1@columbia.edu.
(5)The Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain, 
Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. oa1@columbia.edu.
(6)Department of Medicine, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. 
oa1@columbia.edu.

Oligomerization of soluble tau protein is attracting the attention of an 
increasingly larger number of scientists involved in research on Alzheimer's 
disease and other tauopathies. A variety of methods have been developed for the 
purification of proteins from biological tissues and bacterial cells. Various 
types of high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and affinity tags 
represent the most common techniques for isolating proteins. Here, we describe a 
procedure for extracting recombinant tau protein from bacterial cells, utilizing 
a 6×His affinity tag, or endogenous tau from brain cortices using acid 
extraction followed by fast protein liquid chromatography (FPLC). Additionally, 
we introduce a method for oligomerization based on reduction and oxidation of 
cysteine residues. Our preparation assures high yield of tau protein, while 
preserving its physiological function.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-7816-8_7
PMCID: PMC8375413
PMID: 29886529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Methods Mol Biol. 2017;1523:21-31. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-6598-4_2.

Global Conformation of Tau Protein Mapped by Raman Spectroscopy.

Gorantla NV(1)(2), Khandelwal P(2)(3), Poddar P(2)(3), Chinnathambi S(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Neurobiology Group, Division of Biochemical Sciences, CSIR-National Chemical 
Laboratory (CSIR-NCL), Dr. Homi Bhabha Road, 411008, Pune, Maharashtra, India.
(2)Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), 10025, New Delhi, 
India.
(3)Physical and Materials Chemistry Division, CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory 
(CSIR-NCL), Dr. Homi Bhabha Road, 411008 Pune, Maharashtra, India.
(4)Neurobiology Group, Division of Biochemical Sciences, CSIR-National Chemical 
Laboratory (CSIR-NCL), Dr. Homi Bhabha Road, 411008, Pune, Maharashtra, India. 
s.chinnathambi@ncl.res.in.
(5)Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), 10025, New Delhi, 
India. s.chinnathambi@ncl.res.in.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is one of the neurodegenerative disease characterized 
by progressive neuronal loss in the brain. Its two major hallmarks are 
extracellular senile plaques and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), 
formed by aggregation of amyloid β-42 (Aβ-42) and Tau protein respectively. 
Aβ-42 is a transmembrane protein, which is produced after the sequential action 
of β- and γ-secretases, thus obtained peptide is released extracellularly and 
gets deposited on the neuron forming senile plaques. NFTs are composed of 
microtubule-associated protein-Tau (MAPT). Tau protein's major function is to 
stabilize the microtubule that provides a track on which the cargo proteins are 
shuttled and the stabilized microtubule also maintains shape and integrity of 
the neuronal cell. Tau protein is subjected to various modifications such as 
phosphorylation, ubiquitination, glycation, acetylation, truncation, 
glycosylation, deamination, and oxidation; these modifications ultimately lead 
to its aggregation. Phosphorylation is the major modification and is extensively 
studied with respect to Tau protein. Tau protein, however, undergoes certain 
level of phosphorylation and dephosphorylation, which regulates its affinity for 
microtubule and ultimately leading to microtubule assembly and disassembly. Our 
main aim was to study the native state of longest isoform of Tau (hTau40WT-4R2N) 
and its shortest isoform, (hTau23WT-3R0N), at various temperatures such as 10, 
25, and 37 °C. Raman spectroscopic results suggested that the proportion of 
random coils or unordered structure depends on the temperature of the protein 
environment. Upon increase in the temperature from 10 to 37 °C, the proportion 
of random coils or unordered structures increased in the case of hTau40WT. 
However, we did not find a significant effect of temperature on the structure of 
hTau23WT. This current approach enables one to analyze the global conformation 
of soluble Tau in solution.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-6598-4_2
PMID: 27975242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Proteome Res. 2016 Feb 5;15(2):667-76. doi: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.5b01001. 
Epub 2016 Jan 19.

Tau Protein Quantification in Human Cerebrospinal Fluid by Targeted Mass 
Spectrometry at High Sequence Coverage Provides Insights into Its Primary 
Structure Heterogeneity.

Barthélemy NR(1)(2), Fenaille F(1), Hirtz C(2), Sergeant N(3), Schraen-Maschke 
S(3), Vialaret J(2), Buée L(3), Gabelle A(2)(4), Junot C(1), Lehmann S(2), 
Becher F(1).

Author information:
(1)CEA, iBiTec-S , Service de Pharmacologie et d'Immunoanalyse, Laboratoire 
d'Etude du Métabolisme des Médicaments, Gif-sur-Yvette 91191, France.
(2)CHU Montpellier, IRMB, hôpital St Eloi, Laboratoire de Biochimie Protéomique 
Clinique et CCBHM , INSERM-UM1 U1040, Montpellier F-34000 France.
(3)Inserm, UMR-S 1172, Alzheimer & Tauopathies, Centre de Recherche Jean-Pierre 
Aubert, Lille, Univ. Lille, Faculté de Médecine, Lille F-59045, France.
(4)Centre Mémoire Ressources Recherche, CHU Montpellier, hôpital Gui de 
Chauliac, Montpellier. Université Montpellier I , Montpellier F-34000 France.

Tau protein plays a major role in neurodegenerative disorders, appears to be a 
central biomarker of neuronal injury in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and is a 
promising target for Alzheimer's disease immunotherapies. To quantify tau at 
high sensitivity and gain insights into its naturally occurring structural 
variations in human CSF, we coupled absolute quantification using protein 
standard with the multiplex detection capability of targeted high-resolution 
mass spectrometry (MS) on a Quadrupole-Orbitrap instrument. Using recombinant 
tau we developed a step-by-step workflow optimization including an extraction 
protocol that avoided affinity reagents and achieved the monitoring of 22 tau 
peptides uniformly distributed along the tau sequence. The lower limits of 
quantification ranged (LLOQ) from 150 to 1500 pg/mL depending on the peptide. 
Applied to endogenous CSF tau, up to 19 peptides were detected. Interestingly, 
there were significant differences in the abundance of peptides depending on 
their position in the sequence, with peptides from the tau mid-domain appearing 
significantly more abundant than peptides from the N- and C-terminus domains. 
This MS-based strategy provided results complementary to those of previous ELISA 
or Western Blot studies of CSF tau and could be applied to tau monitoring in 
human CSF cohorts.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.5b01001
PMID: 26742856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Alzheimers Dis. 2014;39(3):649-60. doi: 10.3233/JAD-131415.

Tau protein provides DNA with thermodynamic and structural features which are 
similar to those found in histone-DNA complex.

Camero S(1), Benítez MJ(1), Barrantes A(2), Ayuso JM(2), Cuadros R(3), Avila 
J(4), Jiménez JS(2).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Química Física Aplicada, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, 
Madrid, Spain Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, CSIC, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Departamento de Química Física Aplicada, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, 
Madrid, Spain.
(3)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, CSIC, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, CSIC, Madrid, Spain Centro de 
Investigación Biomédica en Red sobre Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), 
Madrid, Spain.

Tau protein has been proposed as a trigger of Alzheimer's disease once it is 
hyperphosphorylated. However, the role that native tau forms play inside the 
neuronal nucleus remains unclear. In this work we present results concerning the 
interaction of tau protein with double-stranded DNA, single-stranded DNA, and 
also with a histone-DNA complex. The tau-DNA interaction results in a structure 
resembling the beads-on-a-string form produced by the binding of histone to DNA. 
DNA retardation assays show that tau and histone induce similar DNA retardation. 
A surface plasmon resonance study of tau-DNA interaction also confirms the minor 
groove of DNA as a binding site for tau, similarly to the histone binding. A 
residual binding of tau to DNA in the presence of Distamycin A, a minor groove 
binder, suggests the possibility that additional structural domains on DNA may 
be involved in tau interaction. Finally, DNA melting experiments show that, 
according to the Zipper model of helix-coil transition, the binding of tau 
increases the possibility of opening the DNA double helix in isolated points 
along the chain, upon increasing temperature. This behavior is analogous to 
histones and supports the previously reported idea that tau could play a 
protective role in stress situations. Taken together, these results show a 
similar behavior of tau and histone concerning DNA binding, suggesting that 
post-translational modifications on tau might impair the role that, by 
modulating the DNA function, might be attributable to the DNA-tau interaction.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-131415
PMID: 24254705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Agric Food Chem. 2020 Feb 19;68(7):2054-2062. doi: 10.1021/acs.jafc.9b07022. 
Epub 2020 Feb 7.

Specific Degradation of Endogenous Tau Protein and Inhibition of Tau 
Fibrillation by Tanshinone IIA through the Ubiquitin-Proteasome Pathway.

Cai N(1)(2), Chen J(3), Bi D(1), Gu L(1), Yao L(1), Li X(4), Li H(1), Xu H(1), 
Hu Z(1), Liu Q(1), Xu X(1).

Author information:
(1)Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Marine Bioresource and Eco-environmental Science, 
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory for Plant Epigenetics, College of Life 
Sciences and Oceanography , Shenzhen University , Shenzhen 518060 , PR China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Devices and Systems of Ministry of Education 
and Guangdong Province, College of Optoelectronic Engineering , Shenzhen 
University , Shenzhen 518060 , PR China.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Medicine , 
Shenzhen University , Shenzhen 518055 , PR China.
(4)Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Food Nutrition and Human Health , 
Beijing Technology and Business University , Beijing 100000 , PR China.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a common neurodegenerative disease which is partly 
characterized by the aggregation of hyperphosphorylated Tau proteins forming 
neurofibrillary tangles that promote AD pathogenesis. In this study, we 
investigated the effects of tanshinone IIA (Tan IIA) isolated from Salvia 
miltiorrhiza on Tau degradation in the treatment of AD. The results showed that 
Tan IIA reduced the Tau expression and attenuated Tau phosphorylation in N2a 
cells, Tau-overexpressing cells, and 3×Tg-AD mouse primary neuron cells. 
Moreover, Tan IIA increased polyubiquitinated Tau accumulation and induced 
proteasomal degradation of the Tau protein. Additionally, Tan IIA became bound 
to the Tau protein and inhibited the formation of heparin-induced Tau fibrils. 
In summary, Tan IIA can increase polyubiquitinated Tau accumulation and induce 
the proteasomal degradation of the Tau protein and the binding of Tan IIA to the 
Tau protein, inhibiting the formation of Tau fibrils. Tan IIA may be further 
explored as a potential candidate for AD treatment.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jafc.9b07022
PMID: 31995984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Alzheimers Dis. 2009;16(1):15-27. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2009-0960.

Accumulated amyloid-beta peptide and hyperphosphorylated tau protein: 
relationship and links in Alzheimer's disease.

Huang HC(1), Jiang ZF.

Author information:
(1)Beijing Union University, Beijing, China. hanchang@ygi.edu.cn

The neuropathology associated with Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized by 
the presence of extracellularly neuritic plaques, intracellularly 
neurofibrillary tangles and the loss of basal forebrain cholinergic neurons. The 
neuritic plaque is composed of a core of amyloid-beta peptide (Abeta) while the 
neurofibrillary tangles contain phosphorylated tau protein, and, as such, both 
Abeta and tau are important molecules associated with AD. In healthy human 
bodies, clearance mechanisms for Abeta are available; yet if clearance fails, 
Abeta accumulates, increasing the risk of neurotoxicity in the brain. Tau, one 
of the main microtubule-associated proteins, will be hyperphosphorylated and 
lose the ability to bind microtubules when the homeostasis of phosphorylation 
and dephosphorylation is disturbed in neurons. Accumulated Abeta and 
hyperphosphorylated tau are thought to be coexistent. Research on the 
pathological changes in AD indicates that accumulated Abeta in vivo may initiate 
the hyperphosphorylation of tau. Also, the signal transduction pathways of tau 
hyperphosphorylation may be related to accumulated Abeta. In this review, we 
will discuss how Abeta accumulates, how tau protein is hyperphosphorylated, and 
how accumulated Abeta initiates hyperphosphorylation of tau protein in AD.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2009-0960
PMID: 19158417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Biol Chem. 2019 Jul 19;294(29):11054-11059. doi: 10.1074/jbc.AC119.009198. 
Epub 2019 May 16.

Liquid-liquid phase separation of tau protein: The crucial role of electrostatic 
interactions.

Boyko S(1), Qi X(1), Chen TH(1), Surewicz K(1), Surewicz WK(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, Ohio 44106.
(2)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, Ohio 44106 witold.surewicz@case.edu.

Recent studies have indicated that tau, a protein involved in Alzheimer's 
disease and other neurodegenerative disorders, has a propensity to undergo 
liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS). However, the mechanism of this process 
remains unknown. Here, we demonstrate that tau LLPS is largely driven by 
intermolecular electrostatic interactions between the negatively charged 
N-terminal and positively charged middle/C-terminal regions, whereas hydrophobic 
interactions play a surprisingly small role. Furthermore, our results reveal 
that, in contrast to previous suggestions, phosphorylation is not required for 
tau LLPS. These findings provide a foundation for understanding the mechanism by 
which phosphorylation and other posttranslational modifications could modulate 
tau LLPS in the context of specific physiological functions as well as 
pathological interactions.

© 2019 Boyko et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.AC119.009198
PMCID: PMC6643045
PMID: 31097543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the contents of this article


81. Food Funct. 2019 Dec 11;10(12):7865-7874. doi: 10.1039/c9fo02133g.

Xanthohumol inhibits tau protein aggregation and protects cells against tau 
aggregates.

Zhang M (1), Wu Q , Yao X , Zhao J , Zhong W , Liu Q , Xiao S .

Author information:
(1)Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Marine Biotechnology and Ecology, College of Life 
Sciences and Oceanography, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518060, 
China. sxiao@szu.edu.cn.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disease. The molecular 
mechanisms of AD are not yet clear, and no effective treatments are available to 
cure AD. Because of the huge number of patients and related costs, it is urgent 
to discover new medicines to prevent or cure AD. In this study, xanthohumol 
(XN), a natural botanic compound, is found to inhibit tau protein aggregation 
and disaggregate tau fibrils. XN directly interacts with tau protein at sites 
sporadically located in all four repeating domains with a Kd value of 52 μM. 
Binding with XN does not alter the secondary structures of tau protein. Cellular 
experiments showed that XN exhibits little cytotoxicity and attenuates apoptosis 
induced by tau oligomers. The results provide preliminary experimental data to 
develop XN into medicines, food products, or nutritional supplements for AD. The 
findings also provide data for computational drug design.

DOI: 10.1039/c9fo02133g
PMID: 31793596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2019;1184:47-55. doi: 10.1007/978-981-32-9358-8_4.

Regulation of Tau Homeostasis and Toxicity by Acetylation.

Tracy T(1), Claiborn KC(1), Gan L(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Gladstone Institutes, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(2)Gladstone Institutes, San Francisco, CA, USA. li.gan@gladstone.ucsf.edu.
(3)Helen and Robert Alzheimer's Disease Research Institute, Feil Family Brain 
and Mind Research Institute, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA. 
li.gan@gladstone.ucsf.edu.

Multiple neurodegenerative conditions including Alzheimer's disease and 
frontotemporal dementia are characterized by the accumulation of tau in the 
brain, associated with synapse loss and cognitive decline. Currently, the 
molecular events that lead to tau aggregation, and the pathological effects of 
the tau protein, are incompletely understood. Recent work has highlighted 
aberrant acetylation of tau as a key to understanding the pathophysiological 
roles of this protein. Specific acetylation sites regulate the formation of tau 
aggregates, synaptic signaling and long-term potentiation. Unraveling the 
details of this emerging story may offer novel insights into potential 
therapeutic approaches for devastating neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.1007/978-981-32-9358-8_4
PMID: 32096027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2023 Nov 28;120(48):e2309995120. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2309995120. Epub 2023 Nov 20.

Mapping the configurational landscape and aggregation phase behavior of the tau 
protein fragment PHF6.

Pretti E(1), Shell MS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of California, Santa Barbara, 
CA 93106-5080.

The PHF6 (Val-Gln-Ile-Val-Tyr-Lys) motif, found in all isoforms of the 
microtubule-associated protein tau, forms an integral part of ordered cores of 
amyloid fibrils formed in tauopathies and is thought to play a fundamental role 
in tau aggregation. Because PHF6 as an isolated hexapeptide assembles into 
ordered fibrils on its own, it is investigated as a minimal model for insight 
into the initial stages of aggregation of larger tau fragments. Even for this 
small peptide, however, the large length and time scales associated with 
fibrillization pose challenges for simulation studies of its dynamic assembly, 
equilibrium configurational landscape, and phase behavior. Here, we develop an 
accurate, bottom-up coarse-grained model of PHF6 for large-scale simulations of 
its aggregation, which we use to uncover molecular interactions and 
thermodynamic driving forces governing its assembly. The model, not trained on 
any explicit information about fibrillar structure, predicts coexistence of 
formed fibrils with monomers in solution, and we calculate a putative 
equilibrium phase diagram in concentration-temperature space. We also 
characterize the configurational and free energetic landscape of PHF6 oligomers. 
Importantly, we demonstrate with a model of heparin that this widely studied 
cofactor enhances the aggregation propensity of PHF6 by ordering monomers during 
nucleation and remaining associated with growing fibrils, consistent with 
experimentally characterized heparin-tau interactions. Overall, this effort 
provides detailed molecular insight into PHF6 aggregation thermodynamics and 
pathways and, furthermore, demonstrates the potential of modern multiscale 
modeling techniques to produce predictive models of amyloidogenic peptides 
simultaneously capturing sequence-specific effects and emergent aggregate 
structures.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2309995120
PMCID: PMC10691331
PMID: 37983502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests statement:The authors 
declare no competing interest.


84. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2019;1184:81-95. doi: 10.1007/978-981-32-9358-8_7.

Tau and Axonal Transport Misregulation in Tauopathies.

Combs B(1), Mueller RL(1)(2), Morfini G(3)(4), Brady ST(3)(4), Kanaan 
NM(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational Neuroscience, College of Human Medicine, Michigan 
State University, Grand Rapids, MI, USA.
(2)Neuroscience Program, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA.
(3)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Illinois at Chicago, 
Chicago, IL, USA.
(4)Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Translational Neuroscience, College of Human Medicine, Michigan 
State University, Grand Rapids, MI, USA. nkanaan@msu.edu.
(6)Neuroscience Program, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA. 
nkanaan@msu.edu.
(7)Hauenstein Neuroscience Center, Mercy Health Saint Mary's, Grand Rapids, MI, 
USA. nkanaan@msu.edu.

Tau is a microtubule-associated protein that is involved in both normal and 
pathological processes in neurons. Since the discovery and characterization of 
tau over 40 years ago, our understanding of tau's normal functions and toxic 
roles in neurodegenerative tauopathies has continued to expand. Fast axonal 
transport is a critical process for maintaining axons and functioning synapses, 
critical subcellular compartments underlying neuronal connectivity. Signs of 
fast axonal transport disruption are pervasive in Alzheimer's disease and other 
tauopathies and various mechanisms have been proposed for regulation of fast 
axonal transport by tau. Post-translational modifications of tau including 
phosphorylation at specific sites, FTDP-17 point mutations, and oligomerization, 
confer upon tau a toxic effect on fast axonal transport. Consistent with the 
well-established dependence of axons on fast axonal transport, these 
disease-related modifications are closely associated temporally and spatially 
with axonal degeneration in the early disease stages. These factors position tau 
as a potentially critical factor mediating the disruption of fast axonal 
transport that precedes synaptic dysfunction and axonal degeneration at later 
disease stages. In this chapter, we review the evidence that tau affects fast 
axonal transport and examine several potential mechanisms proposed to underlie 
this toxicity.

DOI: 10.1007/978-981-32-9358-8_7
PMCID: PMC7099581
PMID: 32096030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Neurodegener Dis. 2006;3(4-5):197-206. doi: 10.1159/000095257.

Spectroscopic approaches to the conformation of tau protein in solution and in 
paired helical filaments.

von Bergen M(1), Barghorn S, Jeganathan S, Mandelkow EM, Mandelkow E.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Unit for Structural Molecular Biology, Hamburg, Germany.

The abnormal aggregation of the microtubule-associated protein tau into paired 
helical filaments is one the hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease. This aggregation 
is based in the partial formation of beta-structure. In contrast, the soluble 
protein shows a mostly random coil structure, as judged by circular dichroism, 
Fourier transform infrared, X-ray scattering and biochemical assays. Here, we 
review the basis of the natively unstructured character of tau, as well as 
recent studies of residual structure and long-range interactions between 
different domains of the protein. Analysis of the primary structure reveals a 
very low content of hydrophobic amino acids and a high content of charged 
residues, both of which tend to counteract a well-folded globular state of 
proteins. In the case of tau, the low overall hydrophobicity is sufficient to 
explain the lack of folding. This is in contrast to other proteins which also 
carry an excess charge at physiological pH. By tryptophan scanning mutagenesis 
and fluorimetry we found that most of the sequence is solvent exposed. Analysis 
of the hydrodynamic radii confirms a mostly random coil structure of various tau 
isoforms and tau domains. The proteins can be further expanded by denaturation 
with GdHCl which indicates some global folding. This was substantiated by a 
FRET-based approach where the distances between different domains of tau were 
determined. The combined data show that tau is mostly disordered and flexible 
but tends to assume a hairpin-like overall fold which may be important in the 
transition to a pathological aggregate.

Copyright 2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000095257
PMID: 17047358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2007 Sep;64(17):2219-33. doi: 10.1007/s00018-007-7220-x.

Tauopathies.

Hernández F(1), Avila J.

Author information:
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, CSIC/UAM, Fac. Ciencias, 
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain.

Tau is a microtubule-associated protein predominantly expressed in nerve cells 
that promote microtubule assembly and microtubule stabilization. Tau is a 
cytosolic protein mainly present in axons and involved in anterograde axonal 
transport. In several neurodegenerative diseases, as for example Alzheimer's 
disease, tau metabolism is altered. Thus, alterations in the amount of the tau 
protein, missense mutations, posttranscriptional modifications like 
phosphorylation, aberrant tau aggregation or a different expression of some of 
its isoforms could provoke pathological effects resulting in the appearance of 
neuronal disorders known as tauopathies. The purpose of this work is to review 
the possible mechanisms for tau alterations that could lead to the onset of tau 
pathology. First we will focus on tau turnover, then on tau phosphorylation and, 
finally, on tau aggregation.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-007-7220-x
PMCID: PMC11136052
PMID: 17604998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Morphologie. 2015 Dec;99(327):141-8. doi: 10.1016/j.morpho.2015.03.001. Epub 
2015 Apr 21.

[The testicular microtubule-associated protein Tau: Where, when during 
spermatogenesis?].

[Article in French]

Sigala J(1), Jumeau F(2), Buée L(3), Sergeant N(3), Mitchell V(4).

Author information:
(1)Institut de biologie de la reproduction-spermiologie, CECOS, hôpital 
Jeanne-de-Flandre, centre hospitalier régional universitaire de Lille, avenue 
Eugène-Avinée, 59037 Lille cedex, France; EA 4308 gamétogenèse et qualité du 
gamète, France; Inserm UMR-S 1172 Alzheimer et tauopathies, place de Verdun, 
59045 Lille cedex, France.
(2)EA 4308 gamétogenèse et qualité du gamète, France; Inserm UMR-S 1172 
Alzheimer et tauopathies, place de Verdun, 59045 Lille cedex, France; 
Laboratoire de biologie de la reproduction, CECOS, centre hospitalier 
universitaire de Rouen, 1, rue de Germont, 76031 Rouen cedex, France.
(3)Inserm UMR-S 1172 Alzheimer et tauopathies, place de Verdun, 59045 Lille 
cedex, France.
(4)Institut de biologie de la reproduction-spermiologie, CECOS, hôpital 
Jeanne-de-Flandre, centre hospitalier régional universitaire de Lille, avenue 
Eugène-Avinée, 59037 Lille cedex, France; EA 4308 gamétogenèse et qualité du 
gamète, France. Electronic address: valerie.mitchell@chru-lille.fr.

The Tau protein (Tubulin Associated Unit) is a phosphoprotein of the 
microtubule-associated protein family (MAPs). Its role is the regulation of the 
microtubule polymerization. The Tau protein is naturally present in brain, 
heart, muscle, lung, kidney, pancreas and liver. An expression of Tau protein 
and RNA messengers was also highlighted in the testis that is an organ rich in 
microtubules. The role of microtubules is essential in the stabilization of the 
cellular shape and in cell divisions. In the testis, Tau protein could be 
involved in the division process of the spermatogenesis by acting on the 
microtubular dynamics in the arrangement of the spermatozoon polarity. This 
review synthesizes the current knowledge, the localization and the main 
functions of the Tau protein focused on the testis. The localization and the 
potential roles of the Tau protein during the spermatogenesis are discussed by 
emphasizing the link with the microtubular structures of seminiferous tubules.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.morpho.2015.03.001
PMID: 25908520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Int J Mol Sci. 2018 Feb 25;19(3):645. doi: 10.3390/ijms19030645.

Tau Spreading Mechanisms; Implications for Dysfunctional Tauopathies.

Fuster-Matanzo A(1), Hernández F(2), Ávila J(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular "Severo Ochoa" CSIC-UAM, Universidad Autónoma de 
Madrid, C/Nicolás Cabrera 1, 28049 Madrid, Spain. a.fuster@ms-c.es.
(2)Centro de Biología Molecular "Severo Ochoa" CSIC-UAM, Universidad Autónoma de 
Madrid, C/Nicolás Cabrera 1, 28049 Madrid, Spain. fhernandez@cbm.csic.es.
(3)Centro de Biología Molecular "Severo Ochoa" CSIC-UAM, Universidad Autónoma de 
Madrid, C/Nicolás Cabrera 1, 28049 Madrid, Spain. javila@cbm.csic.es.
(4)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas 
(CIBERNED), Valderrebollo 5, 28041 Madrid, Spain. javila@cbm.csic.es.

Tauopathies comprise a group of progressive age-associated neurodegenerative 
diseases where tau protein deposits are found as the predominant pathological 
signature (primary tauopathies) or in combination with the presence of other 
toxic aggregates (secondary tauopathies). In recent years, emerging evidence 
suggests that abnormal tau accumulation is mediated through spreading of seeds 
of the protein from cell to cell, favouring the hypothesis of a prion-like 
transmission of tau to explain the propagation of the pathology. This would also 
support the concept that the pathology initiates in a very small part of the 
brain before becoming symptomatic and spreads across the brain over time. To 
date, many key questions still remain unclear, such as the nature of the tau 
species involved in the spreading, the precise seeding/template and uptaking 
mechanisms or the selectivity explaining why certain neurons are affected and 
some others are not. A better understanding of the tau spreading machinery will 
contribute to the development of new therapeutic approaches focused on halting 
the abnormal propagation, offering also new perspectives for early diagnosis and 
preventive therapies. In this review, we will cover the most recent advances in 
tau spreading mechanisms as well as the implications of these findings for 
dysfunctional tauopathies.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms19030645
PMCID: PMC5877506
PMID: 29495325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest


89. J Alzheimers Dis. 2018;64(s1):S535-S546. doi: 10.3233/JAD-179942.

Tau Conformation as a Target for Disease-Modifying Therapy: The Role of 
Truncation.

Novak P(1), Cehlar O(1), Skrabana R(1), Novak M(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuroimmunology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, 
Slovakia.

Tau protein plays a major role in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease. 
Despite many decades of intensive research, the cause of the conformational 
switch that leads to the remodeling of the highly flexible conformational 
ensemble of intrinsically disordered protein tau into insoluble filaments is 
still elusive. We show here that truncation of tau may play a causative role in 
this conformational change, as evidenced by results obtained from in vitro 
experiments and from transgenic animal models. This conformational change is a 
common denominator of pathological tau protein assemblies, and a salient drug 
target. The long-running research of truncated tau has led to the generation of 
the first active tau vaccine that has entered clinical trials.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-179942
PMID: 29865059 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2020 Feb;412(5):1193-1201. doi: 10.1007/s00216-019-02350-8. 
Epub 2020 Jan 3.

A dip-and-read optical aptasensor for detection of tau protein.

Ziu I(1), Laryea ET(1), Alashkar F(1), Wu CG(1), Martic S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Oakland University, Rochester, MI, 48309, USA.
(2)Department of Forensic Science, Environmental and Life Sciences, Trent 
University, Peterborough, ON, K9L 0G2, Canada. sanelamartic@trentu.ca.

Neurodegeneration currently remains without a differential diagnosis or cure. 
Tau protein is one of the biomarkers of neurodegenerative diseases commonly 
known as tauopathies. Tau protein plays an integral role in stabilizing 
microtubules and cell structure; however, due to post-translational 
modifications, tau protein undergoes self-assembly into cytotoxic structures and 
is co-localized intra- and extracellularly. Hence, tau protein is a viable 
biomarker associated with protein pathogenesis and neurodegeneration. The novel 
optical biosensor for tau441 protein is based on the aptamer recognition probe 
and the biolayer interferometry (BLI) method for detection. The current 
biotin-aptasensor in combination with the streptavidin surface provides 
real-time monitoring of tau441 protein in the nanomolar range, with the limit of 
detection at 6.7 nM in vitro. The tau441 detection is achieved with high 
selectivity over other neurodegeneration biomarkers which include amyloid-β and 
α-synuclein. The aptasensor also allows for tau441 protein detection in a 
complex matrix such as fetal bovine serum, indicating its utility in other 
biological fluids for diagnostic applications. The optical method is simple, 
rapid and highly selective for point-of-care application which is critical for 
achieving the early and differential diagnosis of neurodegenerative diseases and 
identifying their treatments. Graphical abstract.

DOI: 10.1007/s00216-019-02350-8
PMID: 31900535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Seikagaku. 1992 May;64(5):308-12.

[Tau protein kinase].

[Article in Japanese]

Uchida T(1), Ishiguro K, Arioka M.

Author information:
(1)Mitsubishi Kasei Institute of Life Sciences, Machida.

PMID: 1381736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2020 Dec 15;117(50):31882-31890. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2012460117. Epub 2020 Dec 1.

Regulatory mechanisms of tau protein fibrillation under the conditions of 
liquid-liquid phase separation.

Boyko S(1), Surewicz K(1), Surewicz WK(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, OH 44106.
(2)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, OH 44106 wks3@case.edu.

One of the hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease and several other neurodegenerative 
disorders is the aggregation of tau protein into fibrillar structures. Building 
on recent reports that tau readily undergoes liquid-liquid phase separation 
(LLPS), here we explored the relationship between disease-related mutations, 
LLPS, and tau fibrillation. Our data demonstrate that, in contrast to previous 
suggestions, pathogenic mutations within the pseudorepeat region do not affect 
tau441's propensity to form liquid droplets. LLPS does, however, greatly 
accelerate formation of fibrillar aggregates, and this effect is especially 
dramatic for tau441 variants with disease-related mutations. Most important, 
this study also reveals a previously unrecognized mechanism by which LLPS can 
regulate the rate of fibrillation in mixtures containing tau isoforms with 
different aggregation propensities. This regulation results from unique 
properties of proteins under LLPS conditions, where total concentration of all 
tau variants in the condensed phase is constant. Therefore, the presence of 
increasing proportions of the slowly aggregating tau isoform gradually lowers 
the concentration of the isoform with high aggregation propensity, reducing the 
rate of its fibrillation. This regulatory mechanism may be of direct relevance 
to phenotypic variability of tauopathies, as the ratios of fast and slowly 
aggregating tau isoforms in brain varies substantially in different diseases.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2012460117
PMCID: PMC7749306
PMID: 33262278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.


93. Colloids Surf B Biointerfaces. 2025 Jan;245:114211. doi: 
10.1016/j.colsurfb.2024.114211. Epub 2024 Sep 6.

Real-time detection of Tau-381 protein using liquid crystal-based sensors for 
Alzheimer's disease diagnosis.

Ahn JS(1), Jang CH(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Gachon University, Seongnam-daero 1342, 
Sujeong-gu, Seongnam-si, Gyeonggi-do 13120, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Gachon University, Seongnam-daero 1342, 
Sujeong-gu, Seongnam-si, Gyeonggi-do 13120, Republic of Korea. Electronic 
address: chjang4u@gachon.ac.kr.

Tau is a protein found in the central nervous system (CNS) and is involved in 
stabilizing microtubules in axons. Given the link between Tau levels in the body 
and Alzheimer's disease (AD), there is a demand for straightforward and precise 
strategies to detect Tau in body fluids. In this study, we report liquid crystal 
(LC)-based sensors for the real-time detection of Tau protein, a well-known AD 
biomarker. The sensor uses a detection method based on the orientation change of 
the LC because of the competitive biomolecular interaction between Tau and Tau 
aptamers with the cationic polymer poly-L-lysine (PLL). Tau and its aptamers 
form stable complexes through electrostatic interactions. Owing to the 
consumption of the aptamer, the positively charged PLL fails to interact with 
the aptamer but binds to the negatively charged 
1.2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-(1'-rac-glycerol) sodium salt (DOPG). The PLL 
and DOPG complex alters the orientation of the LC to ensure a planar anchoring 
of the 4-cyano-4'-pentylbiphenyl (5CB)/aqueous interface; this anchoring 
intensifies with increasing Tau concentration, thus enabling the observation of 
a bright optical image. Our LC-based sensor demonstrated a low detection limit 
of 2.77 pg/mL in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and 10.86 pg/mL and 19.31 pg/mL 
in human serum and plasma, respectively. Moreover, it is anticipated to be 
suitable for point-of-care diagnosis of AD because it does not require 
specialized analytical equipment and only requires microliters of sample.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2024.114211
PMID: 39260276 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper


94. Biopolymers. 2017 Sep;107(9). doi: 10.1002/bip.23024.

Tau peptides and tau mutant protein aggregation inhibition by cationic 
polyethyleneimine and polyarginine.

Nadimidla K(1), Ismail T(1), Kanapathipillai M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mechanical Engineering (Bioengineering program), University of 
Michigan-Dearborn, Dearborn, Michigan, 48128.

Tau protein plays a major role in Alzheimer's disease. The tau protein loses its 
functionality by self-aggregation due to the two six-amino acid sequences VQIVYK 
and VQIINK of the protein. Hence it is imperative to find therapeutics that 
could inhibit the self-aggregation of this tau peptide fragments. Here, we study 
the inhibitory potential of a cationic polymer polyethyleneimine (PEI) and a 
cationic polypeptide arginine (Arg) on the aggregation of VQIVYK, and 
GKVQIINKLDL peptides, and tau mutant protein (P301L), found frequently in 
taupathy. Various characterization methods are employed including thioflavin S, 
transmission electron microscopy, and dynamic light scattering to study the 
aggregation/inhibition process in vitro. Results show that PEI and Arg 
significantly inhibit tau peptides and protein aggregation. The study could be 
applied to understand tau protein aggregation mechanism in the presence of 
cationic polymers.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bip.23024
PMID: 28456996 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Phys Chem Lett. 2021 Mar 18;12(10):2576-2586. doi: 
10.1021/acs.jpclett.1c00208. Epub 2021 Mar 9.

Liquid-Liquid Phase Separation of Tau Protein Is Encoded at the Monomeric Level.

Dong X(1), Bera S(2), Qiao Q(3), Tang Y(1), Lao Z(1), Luo Y(1), Gazit E(2), Wei 
G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics, State Key Laboratory of Surface Physics, Key 
Laboratory for Computational Physical Sciences (Ministry of Education), Fudan 
University, Shanghai 200433, People's Republic of China.
(2)Shmunis School of Biomedicine and Cancer Research, George S. Wise Faculty of 
Life Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel.
(3)Digital Medical Research Center, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Shanghai 
Key Laboratory of Medical Imaging Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention, 
Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, People's Republic of China.

Liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) is involved in both physiological and 
pathological processes. The intrinsically disordered protein Tau and its K18 
construct can undergo LLPS in a distinct temperature-dependent manner, and the 
LLPS of Tau protein can initiate Tau aggregation. However, the underlying 
mechanism driving Tau LLPS remains largely elusive. To understand the 
temperature-dependent LLPS behavior of Tau at the monomeric level, we explored 
the conformational ensemble of Tau at different temperatures by performing 
all-atom replica-exchange molecular dynamic simulation on K18 monomer with an 
accumulated simulation time of 26.4 μs. Our simulation demonstrates that the 
compactness, β-structure propensity, and intramolecular interaction of K18 
monomer exhibit nonlinear temperature-dependent behavior. 
295DNIKHV300/326GNIHHK331/337VEVKSE342 make significant contributions to the 
temperature dependence of the β propensity of K18 monomer, while the two 
fibril-nucleating cores display relatively high β propensity at all 
temperatures. At a specific temperature, K18 monomer adopts the most collapsed 
state with exposed sites for both persistent and transient interactions. Given 
that more collapsed polypeptide chains were reported to be more prone to phase 
separate, our results suggest that K18 monomer inherently possesses 
conformational characteristics favoring LLPS. Our simulation predicts the 
importance of 295DNIKHV300/326GNIHHK331/337VEVKSE342 to the 
temperature-dependent conformational properties of K18, which is corroborated by 
CD spectra, turbidity assays, and DIC microscopy. Taken together, we offer a 
computational and experimental approach to comprehend the structural basis for 
LLPS by amyloidal building blocks.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpclett.1c00208
PMID: 33686854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Methods Cell Biol. 2017;141:89-112. doi: 10.1016/bs.mcb.2017.06.008. Epub 2017 
Aug 10.

Conformation-based assay of tau protein aggregation.

Fichou Y(1), Eschmann NA(1), Keller TJ(1), Han S(2).

Author information:
(1)University of California Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA, United States.
(2)University of California Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA, United States. 
Electronic address: songi@chem.ucsb.edu.

Amyloid fiber-forming proteins are predominantly intrinsically disordered 
proteins (IDPs). The protein tau, present mostly in neurons, is no exception. 
There is a significant interest in the study of tau protein aggregation 
mechanisms, given the direct correlation between the deposit of β-sheet 
structured neurofibrillary tangles made of tau and pathology in several 
neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's disease. Among the core 
unresolved questions is the nature of the initial step triggering aggregation, 
with increasing attention placed on the question whether a conformational change 
of the IDPs plays a key role in the early stages of aggregation. Specifically, 
there is growing evidence that a shift in the conformation ensemble of tau is 
involved in its aggregation pathway, and might even dictate structural and 
pathological properties of mature fibers. Yet, because IDPs lack a well-defined 
3D structure and continuously exchange between different conformers, it has been 
technically challenging to characterize their structural changes on-pathway to 
aggregation. Here, we make a case that double spin labeling of the β-sheet 
stacking region of tau combined with pulsed double electron-electron resonance 
spectroscopy is a powerful method to assay conformational changes occurring 
during the course of tau aggregation, by probing intramolecular distances around 
aggregation-prone domains. We specifically demonstrate the potential of this 
approach by presenting recent results on conformation rearrangement of the 
β-sheet stacking segment VQIINK (known as PHF6*) of tau. We highlight a 
canonical shift of the conformation ensemble, on-pathway and occurring at the 
earliest stage of aggregation, toward an opening of PHF6*. We expect this method 
to be applicable to other critical segments of tau and other IDPs.

© 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.mcb.2017.06.008
PMID: 28882313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Neurosci Lett. 2020 Jul 13;731:135091. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2020.135091. Epub 
2020 May 23.

Memantine ameliorates tau protein deposition and secondary damage in the 
ipsilateral thalamus and sensory decline following focal cortical infarction in 
rats.

Liang YB(1), Guo YQ(2), Song PP(3), Zhu YH(3), Zhu PZ(3), Liu RR(3), Xu JM(3), 
Zhang YS(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Stroke Center, The First Affiliated Hospital, 
Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, Guangdong, China; Department of Neurology 
and Stroke Center, Zhuhai Hospital Affiliated with Jinan University, Zhuhai 
519000, China; Clinical Neuroscience Institute, Jinan University, Guangzhou 
510632, Guangdong, China.
(2)General hospital of southern theatre command of PLA, Guangzhou 510000, 
Guangdong, China.
(3)Department of Neurology and Stroke Center, The First Affiliated Hospital, 
Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, Guangdong, China; Clinical Neuroscience 
Institute, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, Guangdong, China.
(4)Department of Neurology and Stroke Center, The First Affiliated Hospital, 
Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, Guangdong, China; Clinical Neuroscience 
Institute, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, Guangdong, China. Electronic 
address: zhangys@jnu.edu.cn.

Previous studies have reported that memantine presents evidence of therapeutic 
benefits in several animal models of ischemic stroke and neurodegenerative 
diseases. However, the effect of memantine on secondary damage in the 
ipsilateral thalamus after focal cortical infarction remains undefined. Present 
study investigated whether memantine has a protective effect on secondary damage 
in the ipsilateral thalamus after focal cerebral infarction in rats. At 24 h 
after distal middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO), rats in the memantine and 
vehicle groups were intraperitoneal injected with memantine and isopycnic 
vehicle, respectively, was once daily administered for consecutive 7 days. 
Infarct size was evaluated through Nissl staining and sensory decline determined 
using adhesive removal test. Secondary thalamic damage was assessed using Nissl 
staining and immunofluorescence 8 days after MCAO. Immunoboltting was used to 
identify tau and apoptosis-associated proteins in the ipsilateral thalamus after 
MCAO. Results revealed that memantine ameliorated sensory decline compared to 
the vehicle controls. Subsequently, tau phosphorylated at threonine 231 
(p-tau-231), glycogen synthase kinase3βpY216 (GSK3βpY216) and protein 
phosphatase 2A (PP2ApY307) were reduced by memantine, causing greater reduction 
in neuronal loss and inhibition of reactive astrogliosis in the ipsilateral 
ventroposterior thalamic nucleus (VPN) compared with the vehicle groups. In 
addition, increase in secondary damage-induced TUNEL-positive cells was blunted 
by memantine, as demonstrated by the significant reduction in expression of 
apoptosis-associated proteins. Our results suggest that memantine has a 
neuro-protective effect on secondary damage in the ipsilateral thalamus 
following MCAO by inhibiting the activity of GSK3βpY216/PP2ApY307 and down 
regulating the levels of p-tau-231 protein.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2020.135091
PMID: 32454152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Structure. 2019 Nov 5;27(11):1710-1715.e4. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2019.09.003. Epub 
2019 Oct 15.

Insight into the Structure of the "Unstructured" Tau Protein.

Popov KI(1), Makepeace KAT(2), Petrotchenko EV(3), Dokholyan NV(4), Borchers 
CH(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of North Carolina, 
Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.
(2)University of Victoria-Genome British Columbia Proteomics Centre, 3101-4464 
Markham Street, Vancouver Island Technology Park, Victoria, BC V8Z7X8, Canada.
(3)Segal Cancer Proteomics Centre, Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General 
Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, QC, H3T 1E2, Canada.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, 
Penn State College of Medicine, Hershey, PA 17033, USA. Electronic address: 
dokh@psu.edu.
(5)University of Victoria-Genome British Columbia Proteomics Centre, 3101-4464 
Markham Street, Vancouver Island Technology Park, Victoria, BC V8Z7X8, Canada; 
Segal Cancer Proteomics Centre, Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital, 
McGill University, Montreal, QC, H3T 1E2, Canada; Department of Biochemistry and 
Microbiology, University of Victoria, Petch Building, Room 270d, 3800 Finnerty 
Road, Victoria, BC V8P 5C2, Canada; Gerald Bronfman Department of Oncology, 
Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, QC, H3T 1E2, Canada. 
Electronic address: christoph.borchers@mcgill.ca.

Combining structural proteomics experimental data with computational methods is 
a powerful tool for protein structure prediction. Here, we apply a recently 
developed approach for de novo protein structure determination based on the 
incorporation of short-distance crosslinking data as constraints in discrete 
molecular dynamics simulations (CL-DMD), for the determination of the 
conformational ensemble of tau protein in solution. The predicted structures 
were in agreement with surface modification and long-distance crosslinking data. 
Tau in solution was found as an ensemble of rather compact globular 
conformations with distinct topology, inter-residue contacts, and a number of 
transient secondary-structure elements. Regions important for pathological 
aggregation consistently were found to contain β strands. The determined 
structures are compatible with the tau protein in solution being a molten 
globule at near-ground state with persistent residual structural features which 
we were able to capture by CL-DMD. The predicted structure may facilitate an 
understanding of the misfolding and oligomerization pathways of the tau protein.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2019.09.003
PMID: 31628033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Proteins. 2023 Feb;91(2):147-160. doi: 10.1002/prot.26417. Epub 2022 Sep 13.

N-glycosylation induced changes in tau protein dynamics reveal its role in tau 
misfolding and aggregation: A microsecond long molecular dynamics study.

Mathew AT(1), Baidya ATK(1), Das B(1), Devi B(1), Kumar R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Engineering and Technology, Indian Institute of 
Technology (BHU), Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India.

Various posttranslational modifications like hyperphosphorylation, 
O-GlcNAcylation, and acetylation have been attributed to induce the abnormal 
folding in tau protein. Recent in vitro studies revealed the possible 
involvement of N-glycosylation of tau protein in the abnormal folding and tau 
aggregation. Hence, in this study, we performed a microsecond long all atom 
molecular dynamics simulation to gain insights into the effects of 
N-glycosylation on Asn-359 residue which forms part of the microtubule binding 
region. Trajectory analysis of the stimulations coupled with essential dynamics 
and free energy landscape analysis suggested that tau, in its N-glycosylated 
form tends to exist in a largely folded conformation having high beta sheet 
propensity as compared to unmodified tau which exists in a large extended form 
with very less beta sheet propensity. Residue interaction network analysis of 
the lowest energy conformations further revealed that Phe378 and Lys353 are the 
functionally important residues in the peptide which helped in initiating the 
folding process and Phe378, Lys347, and Lys370 helped to maintain the stability 
of the protein in the folded state.

© 2022 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.26417
PMID: 36029032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2020 Apr 16;59(16):6607-6611. doi: 
10.1002/anie.201916756. Epub 2020 Feb 28.

Semisynthetic and Enzyme-Mediated Conjugate Preparations Illuminate the 
Ubiquitination-Dependent Aggregation of Tau Protein.

Munari F(1), Barracchia CG(1), Franchin C(2)(3), Parolini F(1), Capaldi S(1), 
Romeo A(4), Bubacco L(5), Assfalg M(1), Arrigoni G(2)(3), D'Onofrio M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, University of Verona, Strada Le Grazie 15, 
37134, Verona, Italy.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(3)Proteomics Center, University of Padova and Azienda Ospedaliera di Padova, 
Padova, Italy.
(4)Department of Computer Science, University of Verona, Strada Le Grazie 15, 
37134, Verona, Italy.
(5)Department of Biology, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.

In the brain of individuals with Alzheimer's disease, the regulatory protein 
ubiquitin is found conjugated to different lysine residues of tau protein 
assembled into pathological paired helical filaments. To shed light on the 
hitherto unexplored ubiquitination-linked conformational transitions of tau, the 
availability of in vitro ubiquitin conjugation methods is of primary importance. 
In our work, we focused on the four-repeat domain of tau and assembled an 
enzymatic machinery formed by UBE1, Ubc13, and CHIP enzymes. The enzymatic 
reaction resulted in monoubiquitination at multiple sites, reminiscent of the 
ubiquitination pattern observed in vivo. We further exploited chemoselective 
disulfide coupling reactions to construct three tau regioisomers with 
site-specific monoubiquitination. Protein aggregation experiments revealed that 
the multiple enzyme-derived products were unable to convert into amyloid 
fibrils, while the semisynthetic conjugates exhibited diverse capability to form 
filaments. This study contributes novel insight into the effects of a key 
post-translational modification on aberrant protein self-assembly.

© 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/anie.201916756
PMID: 32022419 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Analyst. 2012 May 7;137(9):2042-6. doi: 10.1039/c2an35097a. Epub 2012 Mar 23.

Electrochemical investigations into Tau protein phosphorylations.

Martić S(1), Beheshti S, Rains MK, Kraatz HB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical and Environmental Sciences, University of Toronto at 
Scarborough, Toronto, Canada.

Hyperphosphorylation of Tau, a protein that stabilizes microtubules, leads to 
the breakdown of the microtubular structure and ultimately to the formation of 
neurofibrillar tangles within neurons. Here, we report monitoring of Tau 
phosphorylations electrochemically, using Tau protein films chemically linked to 
gold surfaces and 5'-γ-ferrocenyl (Fc) adenosine triphosphate (Fc-ATP) as a 
co-substrate. Fc-phosphorylation reactions of Tau are explored using the three 
protein kinases, glycogen synthase kinase (GSK-3β), sarcoma (Src)-related 
kinase, and protein kinase A (PKA), which catalyze Fc-phosphorylation of 
different residues and regions within Tau. The kinetic parameters of the 
biochemical process (K(M) and V(max)) were determined.

DOI: 10.1039/c2an35097a
PMID: 22441328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Neurology. 2006 Jun 13;66(11):1770-1. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000218161.15834.db.

Tau protein hyperphosphorylation in sporadic ALS with cognitive impairment.

Strong MJ(1), Yang W, Strong WL, Leystra-Lantz C, Jaffe H, Pant HC.

Author information:
(1)Cell Biology Research Group, Robart's Research Institute, London, Ontario, 
Canada. mstrong@uwo.ca

The authors have characterized frontal cortical tau protein in cognitively 
intact (4) and cognitively impaired (ALSci, 4) ALS patients and compared it with 
control (2) or Alzheimer disease (AD, 1)- derived tau. The authors observed 
expression of both 3R and 4R tau isoforms; increased insoluble tau protein; 
phosphatase resistance; and hyperphosphorylation at T175, S208, and S210. 
Soluble tau from both AD and ALSci was also phosphorylated at S237. Tau 
hyperphosphorylation is associated with ALS.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000218161.15834.db
PMID: 16769962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2024 Apr 29;56(7):1085-1088. doi: 
10.3724/abbs.2024057.

Construction of a cell-based aggregation and seeding model for the Tau protein.

Hu J(1)(2), Wang L(1), Chen J(1), Liang Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Hubei Key Laboratory of Cell Homeostasis, College of Life Sciences, TaiKang 
Center for Life and Medical Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China.
(2)Office of Core Facility, Shenzhen Bay Laboratory, Shenzhen 518000, China.

DOI: 10.3724/abbs.2024057
PMCID: PMC11322869
PMID: 38682159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.


104. J Biol Chem. 2011 Aug 5;286(31):27236-46. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.248963. Epub 
2011 Jun 9.

Tau protein assembles into isoform- and disulfide-dependent polymorphic fibrils 
with distinct structural properties.

Furukawa Y(1), Kaneko K, Nukina N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Keio University, Yokohama, Kanagawa 223-8522, Japan. 
furukawa@chem.keio.ac.jp

Tauopathies are neurodegenerative diseases in which insoluble fibrillar 
aggregates of a microtubule-binding protein, Tau, are abnormally accumulated. 
Pathological Tau fibrils often exhibit structural polymorphisms that differ 
among phenotypically distinct tauopathies; however, a molecular mechanism to 
generate polymorphic Tau fibrils remains obscure. Here, we note the formation of 
a disulfide bond in isoforms of full-length Tau and show that the 
thiol-disulfide status as well as the isoform composition determines structural 
and morphological properties of Tau fibrils in vitro. Mainly two regions in a 
Tau primary sequence are found to act as structural blocks for building a 
protease-resistant core of Tau fibrils. Interactions among those two blocks for 
building a core structure depend upon the thiol-disulfide status in each isoform 
of Tau, which results in the formation of polymorphic fibrils with distinct 
structural properties. Furthermore, we have found that more diverse structures 
of Tau fibrils emerge through a cross-seeded fibrillation between heterologous 
pairs of Tau isoforms. We thus propose that isoform- and disulfide-dependent 
combinatorial interactions among multiple regions in a Tau sequence endow Tau 
fibrils with various structures, i.e. polymorphism.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.248963
PMCID: PMC3149317
PMID: 21659525 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2006 Oct-Nov;26(7-8):1085-97. doi: 
10.1007/s10571-006-9083-3. Epub 2006 Jun 16.

Intrinsically disordered proteins in the neurodegenerative processes: formation 
of tau protein paired helical filaments and their analysis.

Skrabana R(1), Sevcik J, Novak M.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuroimmunology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, 
Slovakia.

1. Several intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) play principal role in the 
neurodegenerative processes of various types. Among them, alpha-synuclein is 
involved in Parkinson's disease, prion protein in transmissible spongiform 
encephalopathies, and tau protein in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and related 
tauopathies. Neuronal damage in AD is accompanied by the presence of tau protein 
fibrils composed of paired helical filaments (PHF). 2. Tau protein represents a 
typical IDP. IDPs do not exhibit any stable secondary structure in the free 
form, but they are able to fold after binding to targets and contain regions 
with large propensity to adopt a defined type of secondary structure. 
Binding-folding event at tau protein leading to PHF generation is believed to 
happen in the course of tauopathies. 3. Detailed molecular topology of PHF 
formation is unknown. There are evidences about the cross-beta structure in PHF 
core; however the precise arrangement of the tau polypeptide chain is unclear. 
In this review we summarize current attempts at in vitro PHF reconstruction and 
the development of methods for PHF structure determination. The emphasis is put 
on the monoclonal antibodies used as structural molecular probes for research on 
the role of IDPs in pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.1007/s10571-006-9083-3
PMID: 16779670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2019;1184:305-325. doi: 10.1007/978-981-32-9358-8_23.

Tau Prion-Like Propagation: State of the Art and Current Challenges.

Dujardin S(1), Hyman BT(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, MassGeneral Institute for Neurodegenerative Disease, Charlestown, MA, 
USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, MassGeneral Institute for Neurodegenerative Disease, Charlestown, MA, 
USA. bhyman@mgh.harvard.edu.

It has been almost a decade since the hypothesis of active tau protein 
propagation in Alzheimer's disease and associated tauopathies was formally 
raised. We view tau propagation as a cascade of events, starting with early tau 
misfolding, followed by transfer to another, anatomically connected, cell, 
contaminating in corruption of endogenous tau in the recipient cell through a 
seeding mechanism of templated misfolding. These mechanisms are very similar to 
those of other proteinopathies and to ideas about how prion pathologies spread 
through the brain. Nonetheless, the specific mechanisms underlying each of these 
steps remains uncertain and is a fertile ground for new experimental approaches 
potentially requiring new experimental models. We review, here, the state of the 
art of the research on tau prion-like propagation and we highlight some key 
challenges to understanding the detailed mechanisms of cell to cell propagation.

DOI: 10.1007/978-981-32-9358-8_23
PMID: 32096046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Methods Cell Biol. 2017;141:307-322. doi: 10.1016/bs.mcb.2017.06.014. Epub 2017 
Jul 25.

Studying tau protein propagation and pathology in the mouse brain using 
adeno-associated viruses.

Wegmann S(1), Bennett RE(2), Amaral AS(2), Hyman BT(2).

Author information:
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Mass. Institute for 
Neurodegenerative Diseases (MIND), Boston, MA, United States. Electronic 
address: SWEGMANN@mgh.harvard.edu.
(2)Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Mass. Institute for 
Neurodegenerative Diseases (MIND), Boston, MA, United States.

The progressive spread of pathological brain lesions containing aggregated tau 
protein is a hallmark of Alzheimer's disease and other neurodegenerative 
diseases. In AD, this process follows a distinct pattern along neuronal 
connections from the entorhinal cortex to hippocampal areas and further on 
through the limbic system. In other tauopathies, the spread of tau appears less 
hierarchical throughout the brain, and also nonpathological tau is reported to 
cross-synaptic connections in the brain. To be able to study the process of 
cell-to-cell transport of tau and the associated neurotoxicity in the brain in 
vivo, adeno-associated virus-mediated expression of tau can be used to express 
different forms of tau in distinct brain areas in rodent models. As an example, 
we describe how the expression of FTD-mutant human tauP301L in the entorhinal 
cortex of wild-type mice can be used to study the propagation of tau to 
connected neurons and to determine pathological consequences such as tau 
hyperphosphorylation, misfolding, and gliosis. The approach described can easily 
be translated to study other aggregating and/or propagating proteins in the 
brain such as synuclein, Abeta, or SOD1.

© 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.mcb.2017.06.014
PMID: 28882310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Nat Prod. 2012 Sep 28;75(9):1584-8. doi: 10.1021/np300384h. Epub 2012 Sep 18.

Modulation of tau protein fibrillization by oleocanthal.

Monti MC(1), Margarucci L, Riccio R, Casapullo A.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Farmaceutiche e Biomediche, Università degli Studi di 
Salerno, Via Ponte don Melillo, 84084 Fisciano, Italy.

Among the phenolic compounds extracted from extra virgin olive oil, oleocanthal 
(1) has attracted considerable attention in the modulation of many human 
diseases, such as inflammation and Alzheimer's disease (AD). Indeed, 1 is 
capable of altering the fibrillization of tau protein, which is one of the key 
factors at the basis of neurodegenerative diseases, and of covalently reacting 
with lysine ε-amino groups of the tau fragment K18 in an unspecific fashion. In 
the present study, an investigation of the recognition process and the reaction 
profile between 1 and the wild-type tau protein has been conducted by a circular 
dichroism, surface plasmon resonance, fluorescence, and mass spectrometry 
combined approach. As a result, 1 has been found to interact with tau-441, 
inducing stable conformational modifications of the protein secondary structure 
and also interfering with tau aggregation. These findings provide experimental 
support for the potential reduced risk of AD and related neurodegenerative 
diseases associated with olive oil consumption and may offer a new chemical 
scaffold for the development of AD-modulating agents.

DOI: 10.1021/np300384h
PMID: 22988908 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Biotechnol Prog. 2024 Sep-Oct;40(5):e3463. doi: 10.1002/btpr.3463. Epub 2024 Apr 
3.

Development of a pan-tau multivalent nanobody that binds tau aggregation motifs 
and recognizes pathological tau aggregates.

McArthur N(1), Kang B(1), Rivera Moctezuma FG(2), Shaikh AT(3), Loeffler K(1), 
Bhatt NN(4)(5), Kidd M(4)(5), Zupancic JM(6)(7), Desai AA(6)(7), Djeddar N(8), 
Bryksin A(8), Tessier PM(6)(7)(9)(10), Kayed R(4)(5), Wood LB(2)(3)(8), Kane 
RS(1)(3)(8).

Author information:
(1)School of Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering, Georgia Institute of 
Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(2)George W. Woodruff School of Mechanical Engineering, Georgia Institute of 
Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(3)Wallace H. Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Institute of 
Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(4)Mitchell Center for Neurodegenerative Disease, University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, 
Texas, USA.
(6)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Michigan, North Campus 
Research Complex, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(7)Biointerfaces Institute, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(8)Parker H. Petit Institute for Bioengineering and Bioscience, Georgia 
Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(9)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, USA.
(10)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, USA.

Alzheimer's disease and other tauopathies are characterized by the misfolding 
and aggregation of the tau protein into oligomeric and fibrillar structures. 
Antibodies against tau play an increasingly important role in studying these 
neurodegenerative diseases and the generation of tools to diagnose and treat 
them. The development of antibodies that recognize tau protein aggregates, 
however, is hindered by complex immunization and antibody selection strategies 
and limitations to antigen presentation. Here, we have taken a facile approach 
to identify single-domain antibodies, or nanobodies, that bind to many forms of 
tau by screening a synthetic yeast surface display nanobody library against 
monomeric tau and creating multivalent versions of our lead nanobody, MT3.1, to 
increase its avidity for tau aggregates. We demonstrate that MT3.1 binds to tau 
monomer, oligomers, and fibrils, as well as pathogenic tau from a tauopathy 
mouse model, despite being identified through screens against monomeric tau. 
Through epitope mapping, we discovered binding epitopes of MT3.1 contain the key 
motif VQIXXK which drives tau aggregation. We show that our bivalent and 
tetravalent versions of MT3.1 have greatly improved binding ability to tau 
oligomers and fibrils compared to monovalent MT3.1. Our results demonstrate the 
utility of our nanobody screening and multivalent design approach in developing 
nanobodies that bind amyloidogenic protein aggregates. This approach can be 
extended to the generation of multivalent nanobodies that target other amyloid 
proteins and has the potential to advance the research and treatment of 
neurodegenerative diseases.

© 2024 The Authors. Biotechnology Progress published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on 
behalf of American Institute of Chemical Engineers.

DOI: 10.1002/btpr.3463
PMCID: PMC11447142
PMID: 38568030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: No conflict of interest


110. Methods Mol Biol. 2017;1523:215-235. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-6598-4_12.

Tag-Free Semi-Synthesis of the Tau Protein.

Reimann O(1)(2), Smet-Nocca C(3)(4), Hackenberger CP(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Leibniz-Institute for Molecular Pharmacology (FMP), Robert-Roessle-Strasse 
10, 13125, Berlin, Germany. reimann@fmp-berlin.de.
(2)Freie Universitaet Berlin, Institute for Chemistry und Biochemistry, 
Takustrasse 3, 14195, Berlin, Germany. reimann@fmp-berlin.de.
(3)Univ. Lille, CNRS, UMR 8576 - UGSF - Unité de Glycobiologie Structurale et 
Fonctionnelle, 59000, Lille, France.
(4)Research Federation FraBio 3688, Villeneuve d'Ascq, France.
(5)Leibniz-Institute for Molecular Pharmacology (FMP), Robert-Roessle-Strasse 
10, 13125, Berlin, Germany.
(6)Department of Chemistry, Humboldt Universitaet zu Berlin, 
Brook-Taylor-Strasse 2, 12489, Berlin, Germany.

Expressed protein ligation (EPL) is a valuable tool to study site-specific 
functionalities on proteins such as posttranslational modifications. The 
purification of such ligation products from EPL mixtures can be cumbersome due 
to a small size difference between the expressed protein portion and the desired 
ligated protein. Therefore, affinity tags are often required, which remain on 
the protein after purification. Herein, we present an efficient protocol to 
install a photocleavable biotin building block on synthetic C-terminal 
tau[390-441] and describe its use for purification of full-length semi-synthetic 
tau[1-441].

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-6598-4_12
PMID: 27975252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Biochim Biophys Acta Gene Regul Mech. 2018 Aug;1861(8):762-772. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2018.06.006. Epub 2018 Jun 30.

Tau/DDX6 interaction increases microRNA activity.

Chauderlier A(1), Gilles M(1), Spolcova A(1), Caillierez R(1), Chwastyniak M(2), 
Kress M(3), Drobecq H(4), Bonnefoy E(5), Pinet F(2), Weil D(3), Buée L(1), Galas 
MC(1), Lefebvre B(6).

Author information:
(1)Universite of Lille, Inserm, CHU-Lille, UMRS1172, Alzheimer & Tauopathies, 
Lille, France.
(2)INSERM U1167, FHU-RMOD-HF, Institut Pasteur de Lille, University Lille Nord 
de France, 59000 Lille, France.
(3)Sorbonne Université, CNRS, Institut de Biologie Paris-Seine (IBPS), 
Laboratoire de Biologie du Développement, F-75005 Paris, France.
(4)University of Lille, Center for Infection and Immunity of Lille (CIIL), CNRS 
UMR8204, Chemistry and Biology of Flatworms (CBF), F-59000 Lille, France.
(5)Université Paris Descartes, Centre Interdisciplinaire Chimie Biologie-Paris, 
Inserm UMRS1007, Paris, France.
(6)Universite of Lille, Inserm, CHU-Lille, UMRS1172, Alzheimer & Tauopathies, 
Lille, France. Electronic address: bruno.lefebvre@inserm.fr.

Tauopathies, such as Alzheimer's disease, are characterized by intracellular 
aggregates of insoluble Tau proteins. Originally described as a microtubule 
binding protein, recent studies demonstrated additional physiological roles for 
Tau. The fact that a single protein can regulate multiple cellular functions has 
posed challenge in terms of understanding mechanistic cues behind the pathology. 
Here, we used tandem-affinity purification methodology coupled to mass 
spectrometry to identify novel interaction partners. We found that Tau interacts 
with DDX6, a DEAD box RNA helicase involved in translation repression and mRNA 
decay as well as in the miRNA pathway. Our results demonstrate that Tau 
increases the silencing activity of the miRNA let-7a, miR-21 and miR-124 through 
DDX6. Importantly, Tau mutations (P301S, P301L) found in the inherited 
tauopathies, frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17, 
disrupt Tau/DDX6 interaction and impair gene silencing by let-7a. Altogether, 
these data demonstrated a new unexpected role for Tau in regulating miRNA 
activity.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2018.06.006
PMID: 29966762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Curr Med Chem. 2024;31(20):2855-2871. doi: 10.2174/0929867330666230409145247.

Molecular Mechanism of Tau Misfolding and Aggregation: Insights from Molecular 
Dynamics Simulation.

Zhong H(1), Liu H(2), Liu H(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310058, 
China.
(2)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of New Drug Research and Clinical Pharmacy, Xuzhou 
Medical University, Xuzhou, 221004, Jiangsu, China.
(3)Faculty of Applied Science, Macao Polytechnic University, Macao, SAR, 999078, 
China.

Tau dysfunction has a close association with many neurodegenerative diseases, 
which are collectively referred to as tauopathies. Neurofibrillary tangles 
(NFTs) formed by misfolding and aggregation of tau are the main pathological 
process of tauopathy. Therefore, uncovering the misfolding and aggregation 
mechanism of tau protein will help to reveal the pathogenic mechanism of 
tauopathies. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulation is well suited for studying the 
dynamic process of protein structure changes. It provides detailed information 
on protein structure changes over time at the atomic resolution. At the same 
time, MD simulation can also simulate various conditions conveniently. Based on 
these advantages, MD simulations are widely used to study conformational 
transition problems such as protein misfolding and aggregation. Here, we 
summarized the structural features of tau, the factors affecting its misfolding 
and aggregation, and the applications of MD simulations in the study of tau 
misfolding and aggregation.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/0929867330666230409145247
PMID: 37031392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Protein Expr Purif. 2017 Feb;130:44-54. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2016.09.009. Epub 
2016 Sep 20.

Expression and purification of tau protein and its frontotemporal dementia 
variants using a cleavable histidine tag.

Karikari TK(1), Turner A(2), Stass R(2), Lee LC(2), Wilson B(2), Nagel DA(3), 
Hill EJ(3), Moffat KG(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK; 
Midlands Integrative Biosciences Training Partnership, University of Warwick, 
Coventry CV4 7AL, UK. Electronic address: T.K.Karikari@warwick.ac.uk.
(2)School of Life Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK.
(3)Aston Research Center for Healthy Ageing, School of Life and Health Sciences, 
Aston University, Birmingham B4 7ET, UK.

Recombinant tau protein is widely used to study the biochemical, cellular and 
pathological aspects of tauopathies, including Alzheimer's disease and 
frontotemporal dementia with Parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTPD-17). 
Pure tau in high yield is a requirement for in vitro evaluation of the protein's 
physiological and toxic functions. However, the preparation of recombinant tau 
is complicated by the protein's propensity to aggregate and form truncation 
products, necessitating the use of multiple, time-consuming purification 
methods. In this study, we investigated parameters that influence the expression 
of wild type and FTPD-17 pathogenic tau, in an attempt to identify ways to 
maximise expression yield. Here, we report on the influence of the choice of 
host strain, induction temperature, duration of induction, and media 
supplementation with glucose on tau expression in Escherichia coli. We also 
describe a straightforward process to purify the expressed tau proteins using 
immobilised metal affinity chromatography, with favourable yields over previous 
reports. An advantage of the described method is that it enables high yield 
production of functional oligomeric and monomeric tau, both of which can be used 
to study the biochemical, physiological and toxic properties of the protein.

Copyright Â© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2016.09.009
PMCID: PMC5147519
PMID: 27663563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Neurosci. 2005 Feb 2;25(5):1226-33. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3263-04.2005.

Tau protein is cross-linked by transglutaminase in P301L tau transgenic mice.

Halverson RA(1), Lewis J, Frausto S, Hutton M, Muma NA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Loyola University Chicago Medical Center, 
Maywood, Illinois 60153, USA.

The microtubule-associated protein tau is highly soluble under physiological 
conditions. However, in tauopathies, tau protein aggregates into insoluble 
filaments and neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs). The mechanisms underlying the 
formation of tau filaments and NFTs in tauopathies remain unclear. Several lines 
of evidence suggest that transglutaminase may cross-link tau into stable, 
insoluble aggregates, leading to the formation of NFTs in Alzheimer's disease 
and progressive supranuclear palsy. To further determine the contribution of 
transglutaminase in the formation of NFTs, we compared the levels of 
cross-linked tau protein from P301L tau transgenic mice that develop NFTs to 
four-repeat wild-type (4RWT) tau transgenic and nontransgenic mice that do not 
develop NFT pathology. Immunoprecipitation and immunoblotting experiments show 
that transglutaminase cross-links phosphorylated tau in the hindbrain of P301L 
tau transgenic mice but not in mice overexpressing 4RWT tau and nontransgenic 
mice. Cross-linked, phosphorylated tau from P301L tau transgenic mice runs as 
high-molecular mass aggregates on Western blots, similar to cross-linked tau 
from paired helical filaments of Alzheimer's disease. We also used double-label 
immunofluorescence to demonstrate colocalization of PHF-1-immunoreactive tau and 
the transglutaminase-catalyzed cross-link in the hindbrain, spinal cord, and 
cortex of P301L tau transgenic mice. In the spinal cord, 87% of PHF-1-labeled 
cells colocalize with the transglutaminase-catalyzed cross-link. Additionally, 
transglutaminase enzymatic activity is significantly elevated in the spinal cord 
of P301L tau transgenic mice. These studies further implicate transglutaminase 
in the formation and/or stabilization of NFT and paired helical filaments and 
provide a model system to investigate the therapeutic potential of 
transglutaminase inhibitors in tauopathies.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3263-04.2005
PMCID: PMC6725970
PMID: 15689560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Biol Chem. 2024 Sep;300(9):107730. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2024.107730. Epub 2024 
Aug 28.

Alzheimer's disease seeded tau forms paired helical filaments yet lacks seeding 
potential.

Duan P(1), Dregni AJ(1), Xu H(2), Changolkar L(2), Lee VM(2), Lee EB(3), Hong 
M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Institute on Aging and 
Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, Perelman School of Medicine at 
the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Translational Neuropathology Research Laboratory, Department of Pathology and 
Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of 
Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, USA. Electronic address: meihong@mit.edu.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) and many other neurodegenerative diseases are 
characterized by pathological aggregation of the protein tau. These tau 
aggregates spread in a stereotypical spatiotemporal pattern in the brain of each 
disease, suggesting that the misfolded tau can recruit soluble monomers to adopt 
the same pathological structure. To investigate whether recruited tau indeed 
adopts the same structure and properties as the original seed, here we template 
recombinant full-length 0N3R tau, 0N4R tau, and an equimolar mixture of the two 
using sarkosyl-insoluble tau extracted from AD brain and determine the 
structures of the resulting fibrils using cryoelectron microscopy. We show that 
these cell-free amplified tau fibrils adopt the same molecular structure as the 
AD paired-helical filament (PHF) tau but are unable to template additional 
monomers. Therefore, the PHF structure alone is insufficient for defining the 
pathological properties of AD tau, and other biochemical components such as tau 
posttranslational modifications, other proteins, polyanionic cofactors, and salt 
are required for the prion-like serial propagation of tauopathies.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2024.107730
PMCID: PMC11440801
PMID: 39214304 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.


116. J Biomech Eng. 2020 Mar 1;142(3):034501. doi: 10.1115/1.4046330.

Probing Flow-Induced Biomolecular Interactions With Micro-Extensional Rheology: 
Tau Protein Aggregation.

Hosseini H(1), Rangchian A(2), Prins ML(3), Giza CC(3), Ruberti JW(4), Kavehpour 
HP(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran 1416753955, 
Iran.
(2)Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering and Bioengineering, University of 
California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095.
(3)Departments of Pediatrics, Neurosurgery and Bioengineering, Brain Injury 
Research Center, University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095.
(4)Department of Bioengineering, Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115.

Biomolecules in solutions subjected to extensional strain can form aggregates, 
which may be important for our understanding of pathologies involving insoluble 
protein structures where mechanical forces are thought to be causative (e.g., 
tau fibers in chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE)). To examine the behavior 
of biomolecules in solution under mechanical strains requires applying 
rheological methods, often to very small sample volumes. There were two primary 
objectives in this investigation: (1) To probe flow-induced aggregation of 
proteins in microliter-sized samples and (2) To test the hypothesis that tau 
protein aggregates under extensional flow. Tau protein (isoform:3R 0 N; 
36.7 kDa) was divided into 10 μl droplets and subjected to extensional strain in 
a modified tensiometer. Sixteen independent tests were performed where one test 
on a single droplet comprised three extensional events. To assess the 
rheological performance of the fluid/tau mixture, the diameter of the filament 
that formed during extension was tracked as function of time and analyzed for 
signs of aggregation (i.e., increased relaxation time). The results were 
compared to two molecules of similar and greater size (Polyethylene Oxide: 
PEO35, 35 kDa and PEO100, 100 kDa). Analysis showed that the tau protein 
solution and PEO35 are likely to have formed aggregates, albeit at relatively 
high extensional strain rates (∼10 kHz). The investigation demonstrates an 
extensional rheological method capable of determining the properties of protein 
solutions in μl volumes and that tau protein can aggregate when exposed to a 
single extensional strain with potentially significant biological implications.

Copyright © 2020 by ASME.

DOI: 10.1115/1.4046330
PMID: 34043752 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2002 Jan;57(1):M64-70. doi: 
10.1093/gerona/57.1.m64.

The tau protein of oral epithelium increases in Alzheimer's disease.

Hattori H(1), Matsumoto M, Iwai K, Tsuchiya H, Miyauchi E, Takasaki M, Kamino K, 
Munehira J, Kimura Y, Kawanishi K, Hoshino T, Murai H, Ogata H, Maruyama H, 
Yoshida H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Kanazawa Medical University, Ishikawa, 
Japan. hideyuki@kanazawa-med.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is an important problem that should be 
solved in the 21st century. Prior to treatment, a simple and easy diagnostic 
method using biological markers should be available. As a method to attain this 
goal, we detected and determined tau protein in oral mucosal epithelium.
METHODS: Oral epithelium was exfoliated from 34 patients with AD or 29 patients 
with vascular dementia, and 33 young and 34 age-matched controls. Western blot 
was performed for determining the molecular weight of oral tau protein. The tau 
protein level was determined with an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) 
kit for cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). CSF tau was also measured and compared with 
oral tau.
RESULTS: Western blot analysis using an anti-non-phosphorylated tau-protein 
antibody showed two bands, one at 65 Kd and the other at 110 Kd. The tau-protein 
level in oral epithelia showed a significant positive correlation with those in 
the CSF (p <.05). The patients with AD had significantly higher levels of tau 
protein than the patients with vascular dementia and the controls (p <.01). AD 
patients with a younger age at onset of the study showed a higher level of the 
tau protein than the patients with later age at onset (p <.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Like other nonneural tissues, oral epithelium contains small tau 
and big tau. The tau protein in oral epithelium reflects the pathological 
changes, as does the CSF tau. Individuals who develop AD may have had high 
levels of the tau protein in oral mucosal epithelium since early childhood. The 
tau-protein level in oral epithelia could be helpful in diagnosing AD.

DOI: 10.1093/gerona/57.1.m64
PMID: 11773216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


118. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2021 May 26;13(20):23328-23338. doi: 
10.1021/acsami.1c00257. Epub 2021 May 17.

Tau-Targeted Multifunctional Nanoinhibitor for Alzheimer's Disease.

Zhu L(1), Xu L(1), Wu X(1), Deng F(1), Ma R(1), Liu Y(1), Huang F(2), Shi L(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, Key Laboratory of 
Functional Polymer Materials of Ministry of Education, College of Chemistry, 
Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, P. R. China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Radiopharmacokinetics for Innovative Drugs, Chinese Academy 
of Medical Sciences, and Institute of Radiation Medicine, Chinese Academy of 
Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Tianjin 300192, P. R. China.

With the failure of various amyloid-β-targeted drugs for Alzheimer's disease 
(AD) in clinical trials, tau protein has gained growing attention as an 
alternative therapeutic target in recent years. The aggregation of tau exerts 
neurotoxicity, and its spreading in the brain is associated with increasing 
severity of clinical symptoms for AD patients; thus tau-targeting therapies hold 
great potential against AD. Here, a tau-targeted multifunctional nanoinhibitor 
based on self-assembled polymeric micelles decorated with tau-binding peptide is 
devised for AD treatment. Through the multivalent binding effect with the 
aggregating protein, this nanoinhibitor is capable of efficiently inhibiting tau 
protein aggregation, recognizing tau aggregates, and blocking their seeding in 
neural cells, thus remarkably mitigating tau-mediated cytotoxicity. Moreover, 
the formed nanoinhibitor-tau complex after binding is more easily degraded than 
mature tau aggregates, which will be conducive to enhance the therapeutic 
effect. We believe that this multifunctional nanoinhibitor will promote the 
development of new antitau strategies for AD treatment.

DOI: 10.1021/acsami.1c00257
PMID: 33999598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Cell Res. 2022 Aug;1869(8):119275. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2022.119275. Epub 2022 Apr 20.

Histone deacetylase-6 modulates Tau function in Alzheimer's disease.

Qureshi T(1), Chinnathambi S(2).

Author information:
(1)Neurobiology Group, Division of Biochemical Sciences, CSIR-National Chemical 
Laboratory, Dr. Homi Bhabha Road, 411008 Pune, India; Academy of Scientific and 
Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad 201002, India.
(2)Neurobiology Group, Division of Biochemical Sciences, CSIR-National Chemical 
Laboratory, Dr. Homi Bhabha Road, 411008 Pune, India; Academy of Scientific and 
Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad 201002, India. Electronic address: 
s.chinnathambi@ncl.res.in.

Alzheimer's disease (AD), one of the major tauopathies, is multifactorial with a 
massive demand for disease-modifying treatments rather than symptom management. 
An AD-affected neuron shows Tau depositions generated due to overload on the 
proteostasis machinery of the cell and/or abnormal post-translational 
modifications on Tau protein. Loss of memory or dementia is the most significant 
concern in AD, occurring due to the loss of neurons and the connections between 
them. In a healthy brain, neurons interact with the environment and each other 
through extensions and migratory structures. It can thus be safe to assume that 
Tau depositions affect these growth structures in neurons. A Histone 
Deacetylase, HDAC6, has shown elevated levels in AD while also demonstrating 
direct interaction with the Tau protein. HDAC6 interacts with multiple proteins 
in the cell and is possibly involved in various signalling pathways. Its 
deacetylase activity has been a point of controversy in AD; however other 
functional domains remain unexplored. This review highlights the beneficial 
potential of HDAC6 in AD in mediating both Tau proteostasis and cytoskeletal 
rewiring for the neuritic extensions through its Ubiquitin Binding domain (HDAC6 
ZnF UBP).

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2022.119275
PMID: 35452751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


120. BMB Rep. 2016 Aug;49(8):405-13. doi: 10.5483/bmbrep.2016.49.8.084.

Tau mis-splicing in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders.

Park SA(1), Ahn SI(1), Gallo JM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Soonchunhyang University Bucheon Hospital, Bucheon 
14584, Korea.
(2)Department of Basic and Clinical Neuroscience, Maurice Wohl Clinical 
Neuroscience Institute, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, 
King's College London, London SE5 9NU, UK.

Tau proteins, which stabilize the structure and regulate the dynamics of 
microtubules, also play important roles in axonal transport and signal 
transduction. Tau proteins are missorted, aggregated, and found as tau 
inclusions under many pathological conditions associated with neurodegenerative 
disorders, which are collectively known as tauopathies. In the adult human 
brain, tau protein can be expressed in six isoforms due to alternative splicing. 
The aberrant splicing of tau pre-mRNA has been consistently identified in a 
variety of tauopathies but is not restricted to these types of disorders as it 
is also present in patients with non-tau proteinopathies and RNAopathies. Tau 
mis-splicing results in isoform-specific impairments in normal physiological 
function and enhanced recruitment of excessive tau isoforms into the 
pathological process. A variety of factors are involved in the complex set of 
mechanisms underlying tau mis-splicing, but variation in the cis-element, 
methylation of the MAPT gene, genetic polymorphisms, the quantity and activity 
of spliceosomal proteins, and the patency of other RNA-binding proteins, are 
related to aberrant splicing. Currently, there is a lack of appropriate 
therapeutic strategies aimed at correcting the tau mis-splicing process in 
patients with neurodegenerative disorders. Thus, a more comprehensive 
understanding of the relationship between tau mis-splicing and neurodegenerative 
disorders will aid in the development of efficient therapeutic strategies for 
patients with a tauopathy or other, related neurodegenerative disorders. [BMB 
Reports 2016; 49(8): 405-413].

DOI: 10.5483/bmbrep.2016.49.8.084
PMCID: PMC5070727
PMID: 27222125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Biol Chem. 2018 Feb 16;293(7):2408-2421. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M117.815357. Epub 
2017 Dec 19.

Distinct differences in prion-like seeding and aggregation between Tau protein 
variants provide mechanistic insights into tauopathies.

Strang KH(1)(2), Croft CL(1)(2), Sorrentino ZA(1)(2), Chakrabarty P(1)(2)(3), 
Golde TE(1)(2)(3), Giasson BI(4)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Neuroscience.
(2)the Center for Translational Research in Neurodegenerative Disease, and.
(3)the McKnight Brain Institute, College of Medicine University of Florida, 
Gainesville, Florida 32610.
(4)From the Department of Neuroscience, bgiasson@ufl.edu.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2018 Mar 23;293(12):4579. doi: 10.1074/jbc.AAC118.002657.

The accumulation of aberrantly aggregated MAPT (microtubule-associated protein 
Tau) defines a spectrum of tauopathies, including Alzheimer's disease. Mutations 
in the MAPT gene cause frontotemporal dementia with Parkinsonism linked to 
chromosome 17 (FTDP-17), characterized by neuronal pathological Tau inclusions 
in the form of neurofibrillary tangles and Pick bodies and in some cases glial 
Tau pathology. Increasing evidence points to the importance of prion-like 
seeding as a mechanism for the pathological spread in tauopathy and other 
neurodegenerative diseases. Herein, using a cell culture model, we examined a 
multitude of genetic FTDP-17 Tau variants for their ability to be seeded by 
exogenous Tau fibrils. Our findings revealed stark differences between FTDP-17 
Tau variants in their ability to be seeded, with variants at Pro301 and Ser320 
showing robust aggregation with seeding. Similarly, we elucidated the importance 
of certain Tau protein regions and unique residues, including the role of Pro301 
in inhibiting Tau aggregation. We also revealed potential barriers in 
cross-seeding between three-repeat and four-repeat Tau isoforms. Overall, these 
differences alluded to potential mechanistic differences between wildtype and 
FTDP-17 Tau variants, as well as different Tau isoforms, in influencing Tau 
aggregation. Furthermore, by combining two FTDP-17 Tau variants (either P301L or 
P301S with S320F), we generated aggressive models of tauopathy that do not 
require exogenous seeding. These models will allow for rapid screening of 
potential therapeutics to alleviate Tau aggregation without the need for 
exogenous Tau fibrils. Together, these studies provide novel insights in the 
molecular determinants that modulate Tau aggregation.

© 2018 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M117.815357
PMCID: PMC5818185
PMID: 29259137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the contents of this article


122. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Sep 20;22(18):10145. doi: 10.3390/ijms221810145.

Non-Canonical Roles of Tau and Their Contribution to Synaptic Dysfunction.

Siano G(1), Falcicchia C(2), Origlia N(2), Cattaneo A(1)(3), Di Primio C(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biology, BIO@SNS, Scuola Normale Superiore, Piazza dei 
Cavalieri 7, 56126 Pisa, Italy.
(2)Institute of Neuroscience, Italian National Research Council, Via Moruzzi 1, 
56124 Pisa, Italy.
(3)European Brain Research Institute (EBRI), Fondazione Rita Levi-Montalcini, 
Viale Regina Elena 295, 00161 Roma, Italy.

Tau plays a central role in a group of neurodegenerative disorders collectively 
named tauopathies. Despite the wide range of diverse symptoms at the onset and 
during the progression of the pathology, all tauopathies share two common 
hallmarks, namely the misfolding and aggregation of Tau protein and progressive 
synaptic dysfunctions. Tau aggregation correlates with cognitive decline and 
behavioural impairment. The mechanistic link between Tau misfolding and the 
synaptic dysfunction is still unknown, but this correlation is well established 
in the human brain and also in tauopathy mouse models. At the onset of the 
pathology, Tau undergoes post-translational modifications (PTMs) inducing the 
detachment from the cytoskeleton and its release in the cytoplasm as a soluble 
monomer. In this condition, the physiological enrichment in the axon is 
definitely disrupted, resulting in Tau relocalization in the cell soma and in 
dendrites. Subsequently, Tau aggregates into toxic oligomers and amyloidogenic 
forms that disrupt synaptic homeostasis and function, resulting in neuronal 
degeneration. The involvement of Tau in synaptic transmission alteration in 
tauopathies has been extensively reviewed. Here, we will focus on non-canonical 
Tau functions mediating synapse dysfunction.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms221810145
PMCID: PMC8466023
PMID: 34576308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


123. J Cell Biol. 1991 Nov;115(3):717-30. doi: 10.1083/jcb.115.3.717.

Tau protein binds to microtubules through a flexible array of distributed weak 
sites.

Butner KA(1), Kirschner MW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of California, San Francisco 
94143-0448.

Tau protein plays a role in the extension and maintenance of neuronal processes 
through a direct association with microtubules. To characterize the nature of 
this association, we have synthesized a collection of tau protein fragments and 
studied their binding properties. The relatively weak affinity of tau protein 
for microtubules (approximately 10(-7) M) is concentrated in a large region 
containing three or four 18 amino acid repeated binding elements. These are 
separated by apparently flexible but less conserved linker sequences of 13-14 
amino acids that do not bind. Within the repeats, the binding energy for 
microtubules is delocalized and derives from a series of weak interactions 
contributed by small groups of amino acids. These unusual characteristics 
suggest tau protein can assume multiple conformations and can pivot and perhaps 
migrate on the surface of the microtubule. The flexible structure of the tau 
protein binding interaction may allow it to be easily displaced from the 
microtubule lattice and may have important consequences for its function.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.115.3.717
PMCID: PMC2289193
PMID: 1918161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


124. PLoS One. 2018 Jul 19;13(7):e0201182. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0201182. 
eCollection 2018.

Amyloidogenic cross-seeding of Tau protein: Transient emergence of structural 
variants of fibrils.

Nizynski B(1)(2), Nieznanska H(3), Dec R(2), Boyko S(3), Dzwolak W(2), 
Nieznanski K(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Inter-Faculty Individual Studies in Mathematics and Natural 
Sciences, University of Warsaw, Banacha 2C, Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Faculty of Chemistry, Biological and Chemical Research Centre, University of 
Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology of 
Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland.

Amyloid aggregates of Tau protein have been implicated in etiology of many 
neurodegenerative disorders including Alzheimer's disease (AD). When amyloid 
growth is induced by seeding with preformed fibrils assembled from the same 
protein, structural characteristics of the seed are usually imprinted in 
daughter generations of fibrils. This so-called conformational memory effect may 
be compromised when the seeding involves proteins with non-identical sequences 
leading to the emergence of distinct structural variants of fibrils (amyloid 
'strains'). Here, we investigate cross-seeding of full-length human Tau (FL Tau) 
with fibrils assembled from K18 and K18ΔK280 fragments of Tau in the presence of 
poly-L-glutamate (poly-Glu) as an enhancer of Tau aggregation. To study 
cross-seeding between Tau polypeptides and the role of the conformational memory 
effect in induction of Tau amyloid polymorphism, kinetic assays, transmission 
electron microscopy, infrared spectroscopy and limited proteolysis have been 
employed. The fastest fibrillization was observed for FL Tau monomers seeded 
with preformed K18 amyloid yielding daughter fibrils with unique trypsin 
digestion patterns. Morphological features of daughter FL Tau fibrils induced by 
K18 and K18ΔK280 seeds were reminiscent of the mother fibrils (i.e. straight 
paired fibrils and paired helical filaments (PHFs), respectively) but 
disappeared in the following generations which became similar to unpaired FL Tau 
amyloid fibrils formed de novo. The structural evolution observed in our study 
was accompanied by disappearance of the unique proteolysis profile originated 
from K18. Our findings may have implications for understanding molecular 
mechanisms of the emergence and stability of Tau amyloid strains.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0201182
PMCID: PMC6053212
PMID: 30024984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


125. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2022 Apr 4;61(15):e202112374. doi: 
10.1002/anie.202112374. Epub 2022 Feb 18.

Structural Basis for Chaperone-Independent Ubiquitination of Tau Protein by Its 
E3 Ligase CHIP.

Munari F(1), Mollica L(2), Valente C(2), Parolini F(1), Kachoie EA(1), Arrigoni 
G(3)(4), D'Onofrio M(1), Capaldi S(1), Assfalg M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, University of Verona, Strada Le Grazie 15, 
37134, Verona, Italy.
(2)Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine, University of 
Milan, Milan, Italy.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(4)Proteomics Center, University of Padova and Azienda Ospedaliera di Padova, 
Padova, Italy.

The multi-site ubiquitination of Tau protein found in Alzheimer's disease 
filaments hints at the failed attempt of neurons to remove early toxic species. 
The ubiquitin-dependent degradation of Tau is regulated in vivo by the E3 ligase 
CHIP, a quality controller of the cell proteome dedicated to target misfolded 
proteins for degradation. In our study, by using site-resolved NMR, biochemical 
and computational methods, we elucidate the structural determinants underlying 
the molecular recognition between the ligase and its intrinsically disordered 
substrate. We reveal a multi-domain dynamic interaction that explains how CHIP 
can direct ubiquitination of Tau at multiple sites even in the absence of 
chaperones, including its typical partner Hsp70/Hsc70. Our findings thus provide 
mechanistic insight into the chaperone-independent engagement of a disordered 
protein by its E3 ligase.

© 2022 The Authors. Angewandte Chemie International Edition published by 
Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/anie.202112374
PMCID: PMC9303552
PMID: 35107860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


126. J Proteomics. 2022 Jun 30;262:104591. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2022.104591. Epub 
2022 Apr 14.

In vivo analysis of the phosphorylation of tau and the tau protein kinases 
Cdk5-p35 and GSK3β by using Phos-tag SDS-PAGE.

Hisanaga SI(1), Krishnankutty A(2), Kimura T(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neuroscience, Department of Biological Sciences, 
Tokyo Metropolitan University, Minami-osawa, Hachioji, Tokyo 192-0397, Japan; 
Dementia Research Project, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science, 
Setagaya, Tokyo 156-8506, Japan. Electronic address: 
hisanaga-shinichi@tmu.ac.jp.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular Neuroscience, Department of Biological Sciences, 
Tokyo Metropolitan University, Minami-osawa, Hachioji, Tokyo 192-0397, Japan.
(3)Dementia Research Project, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science, 
Setagaya, Tokyo 156-8506, Japan.

Phosphorylation is a posttranslational modification of proteins that regulates 
many cellular processes, such as communication between cells, cell 
proliferation, cell movements, and gene expression. Therefore, many studies have 
been conducted to determine the significance and function of phosphorylation. 
These studies involve the identification of phosphorylation site(s), kinases and 
phosphatases, and regulatory mechanisms. Recently, phosphorylation sites were 
identified using mass spectrometry and detected by immunoblotting with 
phosphorylation site-specific antibodies. However, the in vivo phosphorylation 
profile of the target protein is not easy to grasp, and the quantification of 
site-specific phosphorylation is challenging if the protein is phosphorylated at 
multiple sites. Phos-tag is a phospho-affinity SDS-PAGE approach in which 
phosphorylated proteins are separated depending on the number and sites of 
phosphorylation during electrophoresis, which overcomes the aforementioned 
problems. We applied this technique to perform an in vivo analysis of the 
phosphorylation of many proteins. In this article, we show our results for the 
phosphorylation of tau protein, p35 Cdk5 activator and GSK3β to reveal the 
utility and power of this technique in protein phosphorylation analyses in vivo. 
SIGNIFICANT: We show the in vivo phosphorylation of tau and two tau kinases 
analysed by using Phos-tag SDS-PAGE. Tau represents about 12 different 
phosphoisotypes when expressed in cultured cells. Tau is differently 
phosphorylated in patients with different tauopathy. Phosphorylation of p35 Cdk5 
activator, which suppress the abnormal activation of Cdk5 by cleavage with 
calpain, is regulated developmentally. The Ser9 phosphorylation is not a proper 
marker of the GSK3β activity in vivo.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jprot.2022.104591
PMID: 35430389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2022 Jun;126:125-137. doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2021.12.002. 
Epub 2021 Dec 9.

Targeting tau only extracellularly is likely to be less efficacious than 
targeting it both intra- and extracellularly.

Congdon EE(1), Jiang Y(2), Sigurdsson EM(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Physiology, Neuroscience Institute, New York 
University Grossman School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, United States. 
Electronic address: erin.congdon@nyulangone.org.
(2)Department of Neuroscience and Physiology, Neuroscience Institute, New York 
University Grossman School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, United States.
(3)Department of Neuroscience and Physiology, Neuroscience Institute, New York 
University Grossman School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, United States; 
Department of Psychiatry, New York University Grossman School of Medicine, New 
York, NY 10016, United States. Electronic address: 
einar.sigurdsson@nyulangone.org.

Aggregation of the tau protein is thought to be responsible for the 
neurodegeneration and subsequent functional impairments in diseases that are 
collectively named tauopathies. Alzheimer's disease is the most common 
tauopathy, but the group consists of over 20 different diseases, many of which 
have tau pathology as their primary feature. The development of tau therapies 
has mainly focused on preventing the formation of and/or clearing these 
aggregates. Of these, immunotherapies that aim to either elicit endogenous tau 
antibodies or deliver exogenous ones are the most common approach in clinical 
trials. While their mechanism of action can involve several pathways, both 
extra- and intracellular, pharmaceutical companies have primarily focused on 
antibody-mediated clearance of extracellular tau. As we have pointed out over 
the years, this is rather surprising because it is well known that most of 
pathological tau protein is found intracellularly. It has been repeatedly shown 
by several groups over the past decades that antibodies can enter neurons and 
that their cellular uptake can be enhanced by various means, particularly by 
altering their charge. Here, we will briefly describe the potential extra- and 
intracellular mechanisms involved in antibody-mediated clearance of tau 
pathology, discuss these in the context of recent failures of some of the tau 
antibody trials, and finally provide a brief overview of how the intracellular 
efficacy of tau antibodies can potentially be further improved by certain 
modifications that aim to enhance tau clearance via specific intracellular 
degradation pathways.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2021.12.002
PMCID: PMC9680670
PMID: 34896021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: EMS is an inventor on 
patents on tau immunotherapies and related diagnostics that are assigned to New 
York University. Some of these are licensed to H. Lundbeck A/S.


128. Hippocampus. 2011 Aug;21(8):827-34. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20798. Epub 2010 May 20.

Role of tau protein on neocortical and hippocampal oscillatory patterns.

Cantero JL(1), Moreno-Lopez B, Portillo F, Rubio A, Hita-Yañez E, Avila J.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Functional Neuroscience, Spanish Network of Excellence for 
Research on Neurodegenerative Diseases, University Pablo de Olavide, Seville, 
Spain. jlcanlor@upo.es

Tau is a neuronal microtubule-associated protein implicated in microtubules 
stabilization, axonal establishment and elongation during neuronal 
morphogenesis. Because of its elevated expression in neocortical regions and 
hippocampus, tau might play a role in sculpting collective neural responses 
underlying slow and fast brain oscillations and/or long-range synchronization 
patterns between hippocampus and neocortex. To test this hypothesis, local field 
potentials were recorded in tau-deficient (tau(-/-) ) and wild-type mice from 
different neocortical regions and from the hippocampus during spontaneous motor 
exploratory behavior. We found that tau(-/-) mice showed hippocampal theta 
slowing and reduced levels of gamma long-range synchronization involving the 
frontal cortex. We hypothesize that the lack of normal phosphorylated tau during 
early stages of development might influence the maturation of parvalbumin 
interneurons affecting the spatiotemporal structure of long-range gamma 
synchronization. Also, the proper functioning of gap-junction channels might be 
compromised by the absence of tau in hippocampal networks. Altogether, these 
results provide novel insights into the functional role of tau protein in the 
formation of collective neural responses and emergence of 
neocortical-hippocampal interactions in the mammalian brain.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hipo.20798
PMID: 20607795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


129. ACS Chem Neurosci. 2014 Dec 17;5(12):1178-91. doi: 10.1021/cn500148z. Epub 2014 
Oct 15.

The role of tau oligomers in the onset of Alzheimer's disease neuropathology.

Cárdenas-Aguayo Mdel C(1), Gómez-Virgilio L, DeRosa S, Meraz-Ríos MA.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biomedicine Department, CINVESTAV-IPN , Ave. Politécnico 2508, 
Colonia San Pedro Zacatenco, México City, D.F. 07360, México.

Most neurodegenerative diseases are characterized by the presence of protein 
aggregates. Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia in 
people over age 60. One of the histopathological hallmarks of AD is the presence 
of tau protein aggregates. Historically, it has been thought that paired helical 
filaments (PHFs) were the toxic form of tau that assembled to form 
neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), but recently there has been evidence that tau 
oligomers, which form before PHFs and NFTs, could be the structures mediating 
neurodegeneration even before the fibrillary tau is deposited. Here, we discuss 
the recent advances in tau oligomer research, their implications on AD and other 
tauopathies, the mechanisms of tau turnover by the principal protein clearance 
systems (the proteasome and autophagy), and the potential use of tau oligomers 
as drug targets for the development of new therapeutic approaches.

DOI: 10.1021/cn500148z
PMID: 25268947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Curr Alzheimer Res. 2019;16(5):379-387. doi: 10.2174/1567205016666190321161032.

In Silico Evaluation of Acetylation Mimics in the 27 Lysine Residues of Human 
Tau Protein.

Kim YC(1)(2), Jeong BH(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Korea Zoonosis Research Institute, Chonbuk National University, Iksan, 
Jeonbuk 570-390, Korea.
(2)Department of Bioactive Material Sciences, Chonbuk National University, 
Jeonju, Jeonbuk 561-756, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Various neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's disease 
(AD), are related to abnormal hyperphosphorylated microtubule-associated protein 
tau accumulation in brain lesions. Recent studies have focused on toxicity 
caused by another post-translational modification (PTM), acetylation of the 
lysine (K) residues of tau protein. Because there are numerous acetylation 
sites, several studies have introduced mimics of tau acetylation using amino 
acid substitutions from lysine to glutamine (Q). However, human tau protein 
contains over 20 acetylation sites; thus, investigation of the effects of an 
acetylated tau is difficult.
OBJECTIVE: Here, the authors in silico evaluated acetylation effects using SIFT, 
PolyPhen-2 and PROVEAN which can estimate the effects of amino acid 
substitutions based on the sequence homology or protein structure in tau 
isoforms. In addition, they also investigated 27 acetylation effects on the 
amyloid formation of tau proteins using Waltz.
RESULTS: 15 acetylation mimics were estimated to be the most detrimental, which 
indicates that there may be novel pathogenic acetylation sites in the human tau 
protein. Interestingly, the deleterious effect of acetylation mimics was 
different according to the type of isoforms. Furthermore, all acetylation mimics 
were predicted to be a region of amyloid formation at the codons 274-279 of 
human tau protein. Notably, acetylation mimic of codon 311 (K311Q) induced the 
formation of an additional amyloid region located on codons 306-311 of the human 
tau protein.
CONCLUSION: To the best of our knowledge, this is the first simultaneous 
in-silico evaluation of the acetylation state of 27 human tau protein residues.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1567205016666190321161032
PMID: 30907318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2012;52(11):1171-3. doi: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.52.1171.

[Alzheimer disease and tau protein].

[Article in Japanese]

Tanaka T(1), Mayuyama D, Takeda M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine.

To elucidate involvement of tau protein in neurodegenerative processes in 
Alzheimer disease and related disorders, self-assembly process and degradative 
process of tau protein were examined. To understand the mechanisms of the 
aggregation, binding affinity of tau protein to 14-3-3 protein, which converts 
tau to a filamentous or aggregated form. was investigated employing a surface 
plasmon resonance assay. Phosphorylation of tau by protein kinase A increased 
affinity of tau to 14-3-3, whereas the phosphorylation attenuated formation of 
filaments or aggregates. FTDP-17 mutation increased affinity of unphosphorlated 
tau to 14-3-3, compared to wild typed unphosphorylated tau. However the 
phosphorylation increased its affinity further to the similar level of the 
affinity of phosphorylated wild typed tau. Similarly the phosphorylation also 
attenuated formation of filaments or aggreeagates from FTDP-17 mutated tau. To 
understand the mechanisms of the intracellular accumulation, possible 
involvement of proteases were studied. Among several proteases, 
puromycin-sensitive aminopeptidase (PSA) was found as a predominant regulator of 
degradation of tau protein. In addition FTDP-17 mutation increased 
phosphorylation of tau proten in cells, and attenuated intracellular degradation 
of tau protein. These results suggest that self-assembly and accumulation of tau 
protein are regulated by phosphorylation, and FTDP-17 mutation affects those 
complexed processes.

DOI: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.52.1171
PMID: 23196553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Am Soc Mass Spectrom. 2018 Jan;29(1):174-182. doi: 10.1007/s13361-017-1815-8. 
Epub 2017 Oct 2.

Probing Conformational Dynamics of Tau Protein by Hydrogen/Deuterium Exchange 
Mass Spectrometry.

Huang RY(1), Iacob RE(2), Sankaranarayanan S(3), Yang L(3), Ahlijanian M(3), Tao 
L(4), Tymiak AA(1), Chen G(5).

Author information:
(1)Bioanalytical and Discovery Analytical Sciences, Pharmaceutical Candidate 
Optimization, Research and Development, Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, Princeton, 
NJ, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Northeastern University, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Discovery Biology, Research and Development, Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, 
Wallingford, CT, USA.
(4)Biologics Development, Global Product Development and Supply, Bristol-Myers 
Squibb Company, Hopewell, NJ, USA.
(5)Bioanalytical and Discovery Analytical Sciences, Pharmaceutical Candidate 
Optimization, Research and Development, Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, Princeton, 
NJ, USA. Guodong.chen@bms.com.

Fibrillization of the microtubule-associated protein tau has been recognized as 
one of the signature pathologies of the nervous system in Alzheimer's disease, 
progressive supranuclear palsy, and other tauopathies. The conformational 
transition of tau in the fibrillization process, tau monomer to soluble 
aggregates to fibrils in particular, remains unclear. Here we report on the use 
of hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) in combination with 
other biochemical approaches, including Thioflavin S fluorescence measurements, 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and Western blotting to understand 
the heparin-induced tau's fibrillization. HDX-MS studies including anti-tau 
antibody epitope mapping experiments provided molecular level details of the 
full-length tau's conformational dynamics and its regional solvent accessibility 
upon soluble aggregates formation. The results demonstrate that R3 region in the 
full-length tau's microtubule binding repeat region (MTBR) is stabilized in the 
aggregation process, leaving both N and C terminal regions to be solvent exposed 
in the soluble aggregates and fibrils. The findings also illustrate the 
practical utility of orthogonal analytical methodologies for the 
characterization of protein higher order structure. Graphical Abstract ᅟ.

DOI: 10.1007/s13361-017-1815-8
PMID: 28971440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Analyst. 2014 Jun 7;139(11):2823-31. doi: 10.1039/c4an00204k.

A protein-based electrochemical biosensor for detection of tau protein, a 
neurodegenerative disease biomarker.

Esteves-Villanueva JO(1), Trzeciakiewicz H, Martic S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Oakland University, 2200 North Squirrel Road, 
Rochester, MI, USA48309. martic@oakland.edu.

A protein-based electrochemical biosensor was developed for detection of tau 
protein aimed towards electrochemically sensing misfolding proteins. The 
electrochemical assay monitors tau-tau binding and misfolding during the early 
stage of tau oligomerization. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy was used to 
detect the binding event between solution tau protein and immobilized tau 
protein (tau-Au), acting as a recognition element. The charge transfer 
resistance (Rct) of tau-Au was 2.9 ± 0.6 kΩ. Subsequent tau binding to tau-Au 
decreased the Rct to 0.3 ± 0.1 kΩ (90 ± 3% decrease) upon formation of a 
tau-tau-Au interface. A linear relationship between the Rct and the solution tau 
concentration was observed from 0.2 to 1.0 μM. The Rct decrease was attributed 
to an enhanced charge permeability of the tau-tau-Au surface to a redox probe 
[Fe(CN)6](3-/4-). The electrochemical and surface characterization data 
suggested conformational and electrostatic changes induced by tau-tau binding. 
The protein-based electrochemical platform was highly selective for tau protein 
over bovine serum albumin and allowed for a rapid sample analysis. The 
protein-based interface was selective for a non-phosphorylated tau441 isoform 
over the paired-helical filaments of tau, which were composed of phosphorylated 
and truncated tau isoforms. The electrochemical approach may find application in 
screening of the early onset of neurodegeneration and aggregation inhibitors.

DOI: 10.1039/c4an00204k
PMID: 24740472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Biol Chem. 2023 Jul;299(7):104891. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.104891. Epub 2023 
Jun 5.

MAP2 caps tau fibrils and inhibits aggregation.

Holden MR(1), Krzesinski BJ(1), Weismiller HA(1), Shady JR(1), Margittai M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Denver, Denver, 
Colorado, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Denver, Denver, 
Colorado, USA. Electronic address: martin.margittai@du.edu.

Fibrils of the microtubule-associated protein tau are intimately linked to the 
pathology of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and related neurodegenerative disorders. A 
current paradigm for pathology spreading in the human brain is that short tau 
fibrils transfer between neurons and then recruit naive tau monomers onto their 
tips, perpetuating the fibrillar conformation with high fidelity and speed. 
Although it is known that the propagation could be modulated in a cell-specific 
manner and thereby contribute to phenotypic diversity, there is still limited 
understanding of how select molecules are involved in this process. MAP2 is a 
neuronal protein that shares significant sequence homology with the 
repeat-bearing amyloid core region of tau. There is discrepancy about MAP2's 
involvement in pathology and its relationship with tau fibrillization. Here, we 
employed the entire repeat regions of 3R and 4R MAP2, to investigate their 
modulatory role in tau fibrillization. We find that both proteins block the 
spontaneous and seeded aggregation of 4R tau, with 4R MAP2 being slightly more 
potent. The inhibition of tau seeding is observed in vitro, in HEK293 cells, and 
in AD brain extracts, underscoring its broader scope. MAP2 monomers specifically 
bind to the end of tau fibrils, preventing recruitment of further tau and MAP2 
monomers onto the fibril tip. The findings uncover a new function for MAP2 as a 
tau fibril cap that could play a significant role in modulating tau propagation 
in disease and may hold promise as a potential intrinsic protein inhibitor.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.104891
PMCID: PMC10404690
PMID: 37286038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that 
could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.


135. ACS Chem Neurosci. 2018 Dec 19;9(12):2997-3006. doi: 
10.1021/acschemneuro.8b00182. Epub 2018 Jul 16.

Structural Basis of Small Molecule Targetability of Monomeric Tau Protein.

Kiss R(1), Csizmadia G(1), Solti K(1), Keresztes A(1), Zhu M(2), Pickhardt 
M(3)(4), Mandelkow E(3)(4), Tóth G(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)MTA-TTK-NAP B - Drug Discovery Research Group - Neurodegenerative Diseases, 
Institute of Organic Chemistry, Research Center for Natural Sciences , Hungarian 
Academy of Sciences , 1245 Budapest , Hungary.
(2)Cantabio Pharmaceuticals , Sunnyvale , California 94085 , United States.
(3)Deutsches Zentrum für Neurodegenerative Erkrankungen (DZNE) , 
Sigmund-Freud-Str. 27 , 53127 Bonn , Germany.
(4)CAESAR Research Center/Max-Planck-Institute , Ludwig-Erhard-Allee 2 , 53175 
Bonn , Germany.

The therapeutic targeting of intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) by small 
molecules has been a challenge due to their heterogeneous conformational 
ensembles. A potential therapeutic strategy to alleviate the aggregation of IDPs 
is to maintain them in their native monomeric state by small molecule binding. 
This study investigates the structural basis of small molecule druggability of 
native monomeric Tau whose aggregation is linked to the onset of Tauopathies 
such as Alzheimer's disease. Initially, two available monomeric conformational 
ensembles of a shorter Tau construct K18 (also termed Tau4RD) were analyzed 
which revealed striking structural differences between the two ensembles, while 
similar number of hot spots and small molecule binding sites were identified on 
monomeric Tau ensembles as on tertiary folded proteins of similar size. 
Remarkably, some critical fibril forming sequence regions of Tau (V306-K311, 
V275-K280) participated in hot spot formation with higher frequency compared to 
other regions. As an example of small molecule binding to monomeric Tau, it was 
shown that methylene blue (MB) bound to monomeric K18 and full-length Tau 
selectively with high affinity (Kd = 125.8 nM and 86.6 nM, respectively) with 
binding modes involving Cys291 and Cys322, previously reported to be oxidized in 
the presence of MB. Overall, our results provide structure-based evidence that 
Tau can be a viable drug target for small molecules and indicate that specific 
small molecules may be able to bind to monomeric Tau and influence the way in 
which the protein interacts among itself and with other proteins.

DOI: 10.1021/acschemneuro.8b00182
PMID: 29944336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Methods Mol Biol. 2017;1523:3-20. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-6598-4_1.

Conformational Dynamics of Intracellular Tau Protein Revealed by CD and SAXS.

Gorantla NV(1)(2), Shkumatov AV(3), Chinnathambi S(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Neurobiology Group, Division of Biochemical Sciences, National Chemical 
Laboratory (CSIR-NCL), Dr. Homi Bhabha Road, 411008, Pune, Maharashtra, India.
(2)Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), 10025, New Delhi, 
India.
(3)Structural Biology Research Centre, VIB, Pleinlaan 2, B-1050, Brussels, 
Belgium. ashkumat@vub.ac.be.
(4)Neurobiology Group, Division of Biochemical Sciences, National Chemical 
Laboratory (CSIR-NCL), Dr. Homi Bhabha Road, 411008, Pune, Maharashtra, India. 
s.chinnathambi@ncl.res.in.
(5)Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), 10025, New Delhi, 
India. s.chinnathambi@ncl.res.in.

A native conformation of a protein is essential for its biological role. In 
certain conditions, some proteins show non-native conformations, leading to 
aggregation, which in turn may produce severe pathologies. Such physiological 
conditions are classified as protein misfolding diseases. Alzheimer's disease 
(AD) is the most common form of dementia. Extracellular senile plaques formed by 
Amyloid β and intracellular aggregates formed by microtubule-associated protein 
Tau (MAPT) are the hallmarks of AD. Physiological role of MAPT is to maintain 
the integrity and stability of microtubules, however it tends to self-aggregate 
forming intracellular paired helical filaments (PHFs) during AD. MAPT is also 
subjected to various post-translational modifications such as phosphorylation, 
glycosylation, truncation, and acetylation. Being natively unfolded, MAPT is 
prone to full characterization at atomic level. Small-angle X-ray scattering 
(SAXS) is often applied in combination with other biophysical methods, like 
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), circular dichroism (CD), fluorescence 
spectroscopy, analytical ultracentrifugation (AUC), or dynamic light scattering 
(DLS) to characterize natively unfolded systems. Here we describe the practical 
aspects of MAPT characterization by SAXS and CD in detail as well as outline the 
inferred structural and functional implications.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-6598-4_1
PMID: 27975241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Sci Rep. 2020 Aug 7;10(1):13324. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-70208-6.

Lipid membrane templated misfolding and self-assembly of intrinsically 
disordered tau protein.

Majewski J(1)(2)(3), Jones EM(4)(2), Vander Zanden CM(2)(5), Biernat J(6)(7), 
Mandelkow E(6)(7), Chi EY(8).

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology, National Science Foundation, 
Alexandria, VA, 22314, USA.
(2)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering and Center for Biomedical 
Engineering, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, 87131, USA.
(3)Theoretical Biology and Biophysics Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, 
Los Alamos, NM, 87545, USA.
(4)Nanoscience and Microsystems Engineering Graduate Program, University of New 
Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, 87131, USA.
(5)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado at Colorado 
Springs, Colorado Springs, CO, 80918, USA.
(6)Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), 53127, Bonn, Germany.
(7)CAESAR Research Center, 53175, Bonn, Germany.
(8)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering and Center for Biomedical 
Engineering, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, 87131, USA. 
evachi@unm.edu.

The aggregation of the intrinsically disordered tau protein into highly ordered 
β-sheet-rich fibrils is implicated in the pathogenesis of a range of 
neurodegenerative disorders. The mechanism of tau fibrillogenesis remains 
unresolved, particularly early events that trigger the misfolding and assembly 
of the otherwise soluble and stable tau. We investigated the role the lipid 
membrane plays in modulating the aggregation of three tau variants, the largest 
isoform hTau40, the truncated construct K18, and a 
hyperphosphorylation-mimicking mutant hTau40/3Epi. Despite being charged and 
soluble, the tau proteins were also highly surface active and favorably 
interacted with anionic lipid monolayers at the air/water interface. Membrane 
binding of tau also led to the formation of a macroscopic, gelatinous layer at 
the air/water interface, possibly related to tau phase separation. At the 
molecular level, tau assembled into oligomers composed of ~ 40 proteins 
misfolded in a β-sheet conformation at the membrane surface, as detected by in 
situ synchrotron grazing-incidence X-ray diffraction. Concomitantly, membrane 
morphology and lipid packing became disrupted. Our findings support a general 
tau aggregation mechanism wherein tau's inherent surface activity and favorable 
interactions with anionic lipids drive tau-membrane association, inducing 
misfolding and self-assembly of the disordered tau into β-sheet-rich oligomers 
that subsequently seed fibrillation and deposition into diseased tissues.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-70208-6
PMCID: PMC7414892
PMID: 32770092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


138. Molecules. 2022 Jan 10;27(2):431. doi: 10.3390/molecules27020431.

An Electrochemiluminescence Biosensor for the Detection of Alzheimer's Tau 
Protein Based on Gold Nanostar Decorated Carbon Nitride Nanosheets.

Jalili R(1), Chenaghlou S(1), Khataee A(1)(2)(3), Khalilzadeh B(4), Rashidi 
MR(4).

Author information:
(1)Research Laboratory of Advanced Water and Wastewater Treatment Processes, 
Department of Applied Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry, University of Tabriz, 
Tabriz 51666-16471, Iran.
(2)Department of Environmental Engineering, Gebze Technical University, Gebze 
41400, Turkey.
(3)Department of Material Science and Physical Chemistry of Materials, South 
Ural State University, 454080 Chelyabinsk, Russia.
(4)Stem Cell Research Center (SCRC), Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, 
Tabriz 51666-14711, Iran.

Human Tau protein is the most reliable biomarker for the prediction of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, the assay to detect low concentrations of tau 
protein in serum is a great challenge for the early diagnosis of AD. This paper 
reports an electrochemiluminescence (ECL) immunosensor for Tau protein in serum 
samples. Gold nanostars (AuNSs) decorated on carbon nitride nanosheets 
(AuNS@g-CN nanostructure) show highly strong and stable ECL activity compared to 
pristine CN nanosheets due to the electrocatalytic and surface plasmon effects 
of AuNSs. As a result of the strong electromagnetic field at branches, AuNSs 
showed a better ECL enhancement effect than their spherical counterpart. For the 
fabrication of a specific immunosensor, immobilized AuNSs were functionalized 
with a monoclonal antibody specific for Tau protein. In the presence of Tau 
protein, the ECL intensity of the immunosensor decreased considerably. Under the 
optimal conditions, this ECL based immunosensor exhibits a dynamic linear range 
from 0.1 to 100 ng mL-1 with a low limit of detection of 0.034 ng mL-1. The LOD 
is less than the Tau level in human serum; thus, this study provides a useful 
method for the determination of Tau. The fabricated ECL immunosensor was 
successfully applied to the detection of Tau, the biomarker in serum samples. 
Therefore, the present approach is very promising for application in diagnosing 
AD within the early stages of the disease.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules27020431
PMCID: PMC8779933
PMID: 35056745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


139. Neuropharmacology. 2020 May 1;167:107842. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2019.107842. 
Epub 2019 Nov 5.

Disease-modifying strategies in primary tauopathies.

Rösler TW(1), Costa M(1), Höglinger GU(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Technical University of Munich, 81675, Munich, Germany; 
Department of Translational Neurodegeneration, German Center for 
Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), 81377, Munich, Germany.
(2)School of Medicine, Technical University of Munich, 81675, Munich, Germany; 
Department of Translational Neurodegeneration, German Center for 
Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), 81377, Munich, Germany; Department of 
Neurology, Hannover Medical School, 30625, Hannover, Germany. Electronic 
address: guenter.hoeglinger@dzne.de.

Tauopathies are neurodegenerative brain diseases that are characterized by the 
formation of intraneuronal inclusions containing the microtubule-associated 
protein tau. This major hallmark defines tau pathology which is predominant in 
primary tauopathies, while in secondary forms additional driving forces are 
involved. In the course of the disease, different brain areas degenerate and 
lead to severe defects of language, behavior and movement. Although 
neuropathologically heterogeneous, primary tauopathies share a common feature, 
which is the generation of abnormal tau species that aggregate and progress into 
filamentous deposits in neurons. Mechanisms that are involved in this 
disease-related process offer a broad range of targets for disease-modifying 
therapeutics. The present review provides an up-to-date overview of currently 
known targets in primary tauopathies and their possible therapeutic modulation. 
It is structured into four major targets, the post-translational modifications 
of tau and tau aggregation, protein homeostasis, disease propagation, and tau 
genetics. Chances, as well as obstacles in the development of effective 
therapies are highlighted. Some therapeutic strategies, e.g., passive or active 
immunization, have already reached clinical development, raising hopes for 
affected patients. Other concepts, e.g., distinct modulators of proteostasis, 
are at the ready to be developed into promising future therapies. This article 
is part of the special issue entitled 'The Quest for Disease-Modifying Therapies 
for Neurodegenerative Disorders'.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2019.107842
PMID: 31704274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Am Chem Soc. 2018 Jul 5;140(26):8138-8146. doi: 10.1021/jacs.7b13623. Epub 
2018 May 22.

The Neuronal Tau Protein Blocks in Vitro Fibrillation of the Amyloid-β (Aβ) 
Peptide at the Oligomeric Stage.

Wallin C(1), Hiruma Y(2), Wärmländer SKTS(1), Huvent I(3), Jarvet J(1), Abrahams 
JP(4)(5), Gräslund A(1), Lippens G(6), Luo J(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, The Arrhenius Laboratories , 
Stockholm University , 10691 Stockholm , Sweden.
(2)Divisions of Biochemistry , Netherlands Cancer Institute , 1066 CX Amsterdam 
, The Netherlands.
(3)Unité de Glycobiologie Structurale et Fonctionnelle, CNRS UMR 8576 , 
Université de Lille , 59655 Villeneuve d'Ascq , France.
(4)Laboratory of Biomolecular Research , Paul Scherrer Institute , 5232 Villigen 
, Switzerland.
(5)Biozentrum , University of Basel , 4056 Basel , Switzerland.
(6)Laboratoire d'Ingénierie des Systèmes Biologiques et des Procédés, CNRS, 
Institut National des Sciences Appliquées, Institut National de Recherche 
Agronomique , Université de Toulouse , 31077 Toulouse , France.

In Alzheimer's disease, amyloid-β (Aβ) plaques and tau neurofibrillary tangles 
are the two pathological hallmarks. The co-occurrence and combined reciprocal 
pathological effects of Aβ and tau protein aggregation have been observed in 
animal models of the disease. However, the molecular mechanism of their 
interaction remain unknown. Using a variety of biophysical measurements, we here 
show that the native full-length tau protein solubilizes the Aβ40 peptide and 
prevents its fibrillation. The tau protein delays the amyloid fibrillation of 
the Aβ40 peptide at substoichiometric ratios, showing different binding 
affinities toward the different stages of the aggregated Aβ40 peptides. The Aβ 
monomer structure remains random coil in the presence of tau, as observed by 
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy and 
photoinduced cross-linking methods. We propose a potential interaction mechanism 
for the influence of tau on Aβ fibrillation.

DOI: 10.1021/jacs.7b13623
PMID: 29708745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2015;2015:151979. doi: 10.1155/2015/151979. Epub 2015 Oct 
20.

Tau Hyperphosphorylation and Oxidative Stress, a Critical Vicious Circle in 
Neurodegenerative Tauopathies?

Alavi Naini SM(1), Soussi-Yanicostas N(1).

Author information:
(1)INSERM UMR 1141, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France ; Université Paris 
Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France.

Hyperphosphorylation and aggregation of the microtubule-associated protein tau 
in brain, are pathological hallmarks of a large family of neurodegenerative 
disorders, named tauopathies, which include Alzheimer's disease. It has been 
shown that increased phosphorylation of tau destabilizes tau-microtubule 
interactions, leading to microtubule instability, transport defects along 
microtubules, and ultimately neuronal death. However, although mutations of the 
MAPT gene have been detected in familial early-onset tauopathies, causative 
events in the more frequent sporadic late-onset forms and relationships between 
tau hyperphosphorylation and neurodegeneration remain largely elusive. Oxidative 
stress is a further pathological hallmark of tauopathies, but its precise role 
in the disease process is poorly understood. Another open question is the source 
of reactive oxygen species, which induce oxidative stress in brain neurons. 
Mitochondria have been classically viewed as a major source for oxidative 
stress, but microglial cells were recently identified as reactive oxygen species 
producers in tauopathies. Here we review the complex relationships between tau 
pathology and oxidative stress, placing emphasis on (i) tau protein function, 
(ii) origin and consequences of reactive oxygen species production, and (iii) 
links between tau phosphorylation and oxidative stress. Further, we go on to 
discuss the hypothesis that tau hyperphosphorylation and oxidative stress are 
two key components of a vicious circle, crucial in neurodegenerative 
tauopathies.

DOI: 10.1155/2015/151979
PMCID: PMC4630413
PMID: 26576216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr. 2023;63(32):11153-11168. doi: 
10.1080/10408398.2022.2092446. Epub 2022 Jun 24.

Tau-aggregation inhibition: promising role of nanoencapsulated dietary molecules 
in the management of Alzheimer's disease.

Nagaraju PG(1)(2), S A(1)(2), Priyadarshini P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Nutrition, CSIR-Central Food Technological Research 
Institute, Mysuru, India.
(2)Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad, India.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a cumulative form of dementia associated with memory 
loss, cognition impairment, and finally leading to death. AD is characterized by 
abnormal deposits of extracellular beta-amyloid and intracellular Tau-protein 
tangles throughout the brain. During pathological conditions of AD, Tau protein 
undergoes various modifications and aggregates over time. A number of clinical 
trials on patients with AD symptoms have indicated the effectiveness of 
Tau-based therapies over anti-Aβ treatments. Thus, there is a huge paradigm 
shift toward Tau aggregation inhibitors. Several bioactives of plants and 
microbes have been suggested to cross the neuronal cell membrane and play a 
crucial role in managing neurodegenerative disorders. Bioactives mainly act as 
active modulators of AD pathology besides having antioxidant and 
anti-inflammatory potential. Studies also demonstrated the potential role of 
dietary molecules in inhibiting the formation of Tau aggregates and removing 
toxic Tau. Further, these molecules in nonencapsulated form exert enhanced Tau 
aggregation inhibition activity both in in vitro and in vivo studies suggesting 
a remarkable role of nanoencapsulation in AD management. The present article 
aims to review and discuss the structure-function relationship of Tau protein, 
the post-translational modifications that aid Tau aggregation and potential 
bioactives that inhibit Tau aggregation.

DOI: 10.1080/10408398.2022.2092446
PMID: 35748395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Pept Sci. 2016 May;22(5):327-33. doi: 10.1002/psc.2870. Epub 2016 Apr 12.

Semi-synthesis of a tag-free O-GlcNAcylated tau protein by sequential 
chemoselective ligation.

Schwagerus S(1)(2), Reimann O(1)(3), Despres C(4)(5), Smet-Nocca C(4)(5), 
Hackenberger CP(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Leibniz-Institut für Molekulare Pharmakologie (FMP), Campus Berlin-Buch 
Robert-Roessle-Str. 10, 13125, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Department Chemie, Humboldt Universität zu Berlin, Brook-Taylor-Strasse 2, 
12489, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Freie Universität Berlin, Institut für Chemie und Biochemie, Takustrasse 3, 
14195, Berlin, Germany.
(4)UMR 8576 - UGSF, Univ. Lille, CNRS, Unité de Glycobiologie Structurale et 
Fonctionnelle, F-59000, Lille, France.
(5)CNRS, UMR 8576, F-59000, Lille, France.

In this paper, the first semi-synthesis of the Alzheimer-relevant tau protein 
carrying an O-GlcNAcylation is demonstrated by using sequential chemoselective 
ligation. The 52-amino acid C-terminus of tau was obtained by native chemical 
ligation between two synthetic peptide fragments, one carrying the O-GlcNAc 
moiety on Ser400, which has recently been demonstrated to inhibit tau 
phosphorylation and to hinder tau oligomerization, and the other equipped with a 
photocleavable biotin handle. After desulfurization to deliver a native alanine 
at the ligation junction, the N-terminal cysteine was unmasked, and the peptide 
was further used for expressed protein ligation to generate the full-length tau 
protein, which was purified by a photocleavable biotin tag. We thus provide a 
synthetic route to obtain a homogenous tag-free O-GlcNAcylated tau protein that 
can further help to elucidate the significance of posttranslational modification 
on the tau protein and pave the way for evaluating possible drug targets in 
Alzheimer's disease. Copyright © 2016 European Peptide Society and John Wiley & 
Sons, Ltd.

Copyright © 2016 European Peptide Society and John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/psc.2870
PMID: 27071766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Vis Exp. 2015 Jan 2;(95):e51537. doi: 10.3791/51537.

In vitro aggregation assays using hyperphosphorylated tau protein.

Sui D(1), Liu M(1), Kuo MH(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michigan State University.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michigan State University; 
kuom@msu.edu.

Alzheimer's disease is one of a large group of neurodegenerative disorders known 
as tauopathies that are manifested by the neuronal deposits of 
hyperphosphorylated tau protein in the form of neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs). 
The density of NFT correlates well with cognitive impairment and other 
neurodegenerative symptoms, thus prompting the endeavor of developing tau 
aggregation-based therapeutics. Thus far, however, tau aggregation assays use 
recombinant or synthetic tau that is devoid of the pathology-related 
phosphorylation marks. Here we describe two assays using recombinant, 
hyperphosphorylated tau as the subject. These assays can be scaled up for 
high-throughput screens for compounds that can modulate the kinetics or 
stability of hyperphosphorylated tau aggregates. Novel therapeutics for 
Alzheimer's disease and other tauopathies can potentially be discovered using 
hyperphosphorylated tau isoforms.

DOI: 10.3791/51537
PMCID: PMC4354489
PMID: 25590418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Int J Biol Macromol. 2018 Apr 1;109:188-204. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2017.12.071. Epub 2017 Dec 14.

Can any "non-specific charge modification within microtubule binding domains of 
Tau" be a prerequisite of the protein amyloid aggregation? An in vitro study on 
the 1N4R isoform.

Jangholi A(1), Ashrafi-Kooshk MR(1), Arab SS(2), Karima S(3), Poorebrahim M(4), 
Ghadami SA(5), Moosavi-Movahedi AA(6), Khodarahmi R(7).

Author information:
(1)Medical Biology Research Center, Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences, 
Kermanshah, Iran.
(2)Department of Biophysics, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Tarbiat Modares 
University, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Clinical Biochemistry Department, Faculty of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti 
University of Medical Sciences (SBMU), Tehran, P.O. Box 1985717434, Iran.
(4)Department of Medical Biotechnology, School of Advanced Technologies in 
Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Medical Biology Research Center, Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences, 
Kermanshah, Iran; Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche Sperimentali e 
Cliniche"Mario Serio", Sezione di Scienze Biochimiche, Universita'degli Studi di 
Firenze, Viale Morgagni 50, 50134 Florence, Italy.
(6)Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran.
(7)Medical Biology Research Center, Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences, 
Kermanshah, Iran; Department of Pharmacognosy and Biotechnology, Faculty of 
Pharmacy, Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences, Kermanshah, Iran. 
Electronic address: rkhodarahmi@mbrc.ac.ir.

The aggregation of Tau into amyloid fibrils is a hallmark of neurodegenerative 
diseases such as Alzheimer's disease (AD). Compared to the Aβ peptide, tau 
pathology more closely tracks changes in brain function that are responsible for 
the onset of early symptoms in AD. Tau belongs to the class of intrinsically 
disordered protein and folds into an ordered β-structure during aggregation, a 
process that appears in many cases to be preceded by hyperphosphorylation of Tau 
monomers. Although Tau fibrils can be formed by heparin-induced aggregation of 
un-phosphorylated recombinant Tau, it is important to understanding the paradox 
of Tau's random-like conformations and aggregation propensity. In this study, to 
look into the effect of charge neutralization on Tau aggregation propensity, 
solvent accessible lysine residues were chemically 
acetylated/pseudo-phosphorylated. All Tau variants did not aggregate in the 
absence of the polyanionic factor; however, in contrast to the wild-type 
protein, acetylated and pseudo-phosphorylated variants were not able to 
aggregate even in the presence of the polyanionic cofactor. These aggregation 
incompetent Tau variants may be good analogs for the phosphorylated Tau, to 
explore more about the exact role of the phosphorylated Tau monomers in AD 
progress.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2017.12.071
PMID: 29248553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Prep Biochem Biotechnol. 2017 May 28;47(5):530-538. doi: 
10.1080/10826068.2016.1275012. Epub 2017 Jan 3.

Simplified method to obtain enhanced expression of tau protein from E. coli and 
one-step purification by direct boiling.

KrishnaKumar VG(1), Gupta S(1).

Author information:
(1)a Biological Engineering , Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar, Palaj 
, Gandhinagar , India.

Tau is an intrinsically disordered protein responsible for maintaining the 
structure and stability of axonal microtubules. However, in certain disease 
conditions including Alzheimer's disease, tau protein may undergo biochemical 
and structural changes to form intracellular aggregates. Since tau is a proline- 
and arginine-rich eukaryotic protein, heterologous expression in Escherichia 
coli often results in poor yield and has been a major technical challenge. In 
the current work, we have improved the expressed yield of tau by overcoming 
codon bias problem and established a simplified protocol for efficient 
extraction. The reported method has two distinct features: (i) enhanced tau 
expression (upto eightfold) by supplementing deficient tRNAs that aid in rapid 
translation and (ii) direct boiling of expressed E. coli cells to extract tau 
with no separate cell lysis step. We further demonstrate that tau extracted by 
the direct boiling method is similar to tau purified by size-exclusion 
chromatography exhibiting similar structural and biophysical characteristics 
including aggregation propensity. Since morphologies and in vitro toxicity of 
fibrillar tau aggregates were also similar, tau extracted by the one-step direct 
boiling method can be used for tau aggregation assays without any additional 
purification.

DOI: 10.1080/10826068.2016.1275012
PMID: 28045602 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2019;1184:69-77. doi: 10.1007/978-981-32-9358-8_6.

Mechanisms of Axonal Sorting of Tau and Influence of the Axon Initial Segment on 
Tau Cell Polarity.

Zempel H(1)(2)(3), Mandelkow E(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. 
Hans.Zempel@uk-koeln.de.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany. 
Hans.Zempel@uk-koeln.de.
(3)Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, 
Germany. Hans.Zempel@uk-koeln.de.
(4)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Bonn, Germany. 
Eckhard.Mandelkow@dzne.de.
(5)CAESAR Research Center, Max-Planck-Society, Bonn, Germany. 
Eckhard.Mandelkow@dzne.de.

Tau is a microtubule-associated protein (MAP) that is mainly sorted into the 
axons in physiological conditions, but missorted in Alzheimer Disease and 
related tauopathies. The mechanism(s) of axonal targeting of Tau protein are 
still a matter of debate. Several possibilities for the axonal localization of 
Tau protein have been proposed: (1) Targeting of Tau mRNA into axons which is 
then translated locally. (2) Preferred axonal translation of Tau mRNA. (3) 
Specific dendritic degradation of Tau protein. (4) Active axonal sorting of 
somatically translated Tau protein. (5) Axonal retention of Tau protein by 
specific association of Tau protein with axonal structures, namely particularly 
modified microtubules. (6) Restriction of Tau diffusion by a selective filter 
function of the Axon Initial Segment (AIS). In our research we focused on the 
Tau Diffusion Barrier (TDB), located within the AIS, which controls anterograde 
and retrograde propagation of Tau. It shows both sensitivity to size of the Tau 
protein isoforms, and to disruption of the molecular structure of the AIS. Here, 
we review proposed mechanisms of axonal targeting of Tau and potential 
influences of the TDB/AIS on the subcellular distribution of Tau.

DOI: 10.1007/978-981-32-9358-8_6
PMID: 32096029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Biochemistry. 2012 Mar 27;51(12):2539-50. doi: 10.1021/bi201857v. Epub 2012 Mar 
14.

Interaction of tau protein with model lipid membranes induces tau structural 
compaction and membrane disruption.

Jones EM(1), Dubey M, Camp PJ, Vernon BC, Biernat J, Mandelkow E, Majewski J, 
Chi EY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical and Nuclear Engineering, Center for Biomedical 
Engineering, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87131, United 
States.

The misfolding and aggregation of the intrinsically disordered, 
microtubule-associated tau protein into neurofibrillary tangles is implicated in 
the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease. However, the mechanisms of tau 
aggregation and toxicity remain unknown. Recent work has shown that anionic 
lipid membranes can induce tau aggregation and that membrane permeabilization 
may serve as a pathway by which protein aggregates exert toxicity, suggesting 
that the plasma membrane may play dual roles in tau pathology. This prompted our 
investigation to assess tau's propensity to interact with membranes and to 
elucidate the mutually disruptive structural perturbations the interactions 
induce in both tau and the membrane. We show that although highly charged and 
soluble, the full-length tau (hTau40) is also highly surface active, selectively 
inserts into anionic DMPG lipid monolayers and induces membrane morphological 
changes. To resolve molecular-scale structural details of hTau40 associated with 
lipid membranes, X-ray and neutron scattering techniques are utilized. X-ray 
reflectivity indicates hTau40s presence underneath a DMPG monolayer and 
penetration into the lipid headgroups and tailgroups, whereas grazing incidence 
X-ray diffraction shows that hTau40 insertion disrupts lipid packing. Moreover, 
both air/water and DMPG lipid membrane interfaces induce the disordered hTau40 
to partially adopt a more compact conformation with density similar to that of a 
folded protein. Neutron reflectivity shows that tau completely disrupts 
supported DMPG bilayers while leaving the neutral DPPC bilayer intact. Our 
results show that hTau40s strong interaction with anionic lipids induces tau 
structural compaction and membrane disruption, suggesting possible 
membrane-based mechanisms of tau aggregation and toxicity in neurodegenerative 
diseases.

DOI: 10.1021/bi201857v
PMCID: PMC3319454
PMID: 22401494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Biol Chem. 2019 Jul 19;294(29):11060-11061. doi: 10.1074/jbc.H119.009703.

Driving tau into phase-separated liquid droplets.

Margittai M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Denver, Denver, 
Colorado 80208 martin.margittai@du.edu.

Liquid-liquid phase separation of tau protein has been implicated in normal 
biological function as well as neurodegenerative diseases, including 
Alzheimer's. However, knowledge about these links is still scant, and the 
mechanisms driving tau into liquid droplets are poorly understood. A simplified 
in vitro system that uses unmodified human tau protein now suggests 
electrostatic interactions provide the basic instructions underlying liquid 
droplet formation.

© 2019 Margittai.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.H119.009703
PMCID: PMC6643035
PMID: 31324714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that he has no conflicts of 
interest with the contents of this article


150. J Neurosci Res. 1992 Sep;33(1):19-29. doi: 10.1002/jnr.490330104.

Tau protein induces bundling of microtubules in vitro: comparison of different 
tau isoforms and a tau protein fragment.

Scott CW(1), Klika AB, Lo MM, Norris TE, Caputo CB.

Author information:
(1)ICI Pharmaceuticals Group, ICI Americas Inc., Wilmington, DE 19897.

Expression of tau protein in non-neuronal cells can result in a redistribution 
of the microtubule cytoskeleton into thick bundles of tau-containing 
microtubules (Lewis et al.: Nature 342:498-505, 1989; Kanai et al.: J Cell Biol 
109:1173-1184, 1989). We reconstituted microtubule bundles using purified 
tubulin and tau in order to study the assembly of these structures. 
Taxol-stabilized tubulin polymers were incubated with various concentrations of 
recombinant human tau and examined by electron microscopy. With increasing 
concentrations of tau 3 (tau isoform containing three microtubule binding 
domains) or tau 4 (isoform containing four microtubule binding domains) the 
microtubules changed orientation from a random distribution to loosely and 
tightly packed parallel arrays and then to thick cables. In contrast, tau 4L, 
the tau isoform containing four microtubule binding domains plus a 58-amino acid 
insert near the N-terminus, showed minimal bundling activity. tau 4-induced 
bundling could be inhibited by the addition of 0.5 M NaCl or 0.4 mM estramustine 
phosphate, conditions which are known to inhibit tau binding to microtubules. A 
tau construct that contained only the microtubule binding domains plus 19 amino 
acids to the C-terminus was fully capable of bundling microtubules. 
Phosphorylation of tau 3 with cAMP-dependent protein kinase had no effect on its 
ability to induce microtubule bundling. These results indicate that tau protein 
is directly capable of bundling microtubules in vitro, and suggests that 
different tau isoforms differ in their ability to bundle microtubule filaments.

DOI: 10.1002/jnr.490330104
PMID: 1360542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Neurochem. 1995 Oct;65(4):1658-64. doi: 10.1046/j.1471-4159.1995.65041658.x.

Tau protein from Alzheimer's disease patients is glycated at its tubulin-binding 
domain.

Ledesma MD(1), Bonay P, Avila J.

Author information:
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa (CSIC-UAM), Universidad Autónoma de 
Madrid, Spain.

Glycated residues of tau protein from paired helical filaments isolated from the 
brains of Alzheimer's disease patients were localized by doing a proteolytic 
cleavage of the protein, fractionation of the resulting peptides, and 
identification of those peptides using specific antibodies. The most suitable 
residues for glycation, lysines, present at the tubulin-binding motif of tau 
protein, seem to be preferentially modified compared with those lysines present 
at other regions. Among these modified lysines, those located in the sequence 
comprising residues 318-336 (in the largest human tau isoform) were found to be 
glycated, as determined by the reaction with an antibody that recognizes a 
glycated peptide containing this sequence. Because those lysines are present in 
a tubulin binding motif of tau protein, its modification could result in a 
decrease in the interaction of tau with tubulin.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1471-4159.1995.65041658.x
PMID: 7561862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Mini Rev Med Chem. 2022;22(17):2260-2270. doi: 
10.2174/1389557522666220214092824.

Recent Advancements in Strategies for Abnormal Protein Clearance in Alzheimer's 
Disease.

Gong B(1), Ji W(1)(2), Chen X(1), Li P(1), Cheng W(1), Zhao Y(1), He B(1), 
Zhuang J(1), Gao J(2), Yin Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Second Affiliated Hospital (Changzheng Hospital), 
Navy Medical University, Shanghai, 200003, China.
(2)Changhai Clinical Research Unit, Shanghai Changhai Hospital, Naval Medical 
University, Shanghai 200433, China.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is an intricate neurodegenerative disease with chronic 
and progressive development whose typical neuropathological features encompass 
senile plaques and neurofibrillary tangles, respectively formed by the 
extracellular deposition of amyloid-beta (Aβ) and the intracellular accumulation 
of hyperphosphorylated tau protein in the brain, particularly in limbic and 
cortical regions. The pathological changes are considered to be caused by the 
loss of Aβ and tau protein clearance mechanisms under pathological conditions, 
which leads to an imbalance between the rates of clearance and production. 
Consequently, the main strategies for treating AD aim to reduce the production 
of Aβ and hyperphosphorylated tau protein in the brain, inhibit their 
accumulation, or accelerate their clearance. Although drugs utilizing these 
therapeutic strategies have been studied successively, their therapeutic effects 
have generally been less than ideal. Fortunately, recent advances have been made 
in clearance strategies for these abnormally expressed proteins, including 
immunotherapies and nanomedicines targeting Aβ or tau, which could represent an 
important breakthrough for treating AD. Here, we review recent development of 
the strategies for the removal of abnormal proteins and provide new ideas and 
methods for treating AD.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1389557522666220214092824
PMID: 35156576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Nat Chem. 2018 Feb;10(2):170-176. doi: 10.1038/nchem.2889. Epub 2017 Nov 20.

Structure-based inhibitors of tau aggregation.

Seidler PM(1)(2), Boyer DR(1)(2), Rodriguez JA(1)(2), Sawaya MR(1)(2), Cascio 
D(1)(2), Murray K(1)(2), Gonen T(3), Eisenberg DS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Chemistry and Biochemistry and Biological Chemistry, UCLA-DOE 
Institute, UCLA, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.
(2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, UCLA, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.
(3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Janelia Research Campus, 19700 Helix Drive, 
Ashburn, Virginia 20147, USA.

Aggregated tau protein is associated with over 20 neurological disorders, which 
include Alzheimer's disease. Previous work has shown that tau's sequence 
segments VQIINK and VQIVYK drive its aggregation, but inhibitors based on the 
structure of the VQIVYK segment only partially inhibit full-length tau 
aggregation and are ineffective at inhibiting seeding by full-length fibrils. 
Here we show that the VQIINK segment is the more powerful driver of tau 
aggregation. Two structures of this segment determined by the cryo-electron 
microscopy method micro-electron diffraction explain its dominant influence on 
tau aggregation. Of practical significance, the structures lead to the design of 
inhibitors that not only inhibit tau aggregation but also inhibit the ability of 
exogenous full-length tau fibrils to seed intracellular tau in HEK293 biosensor 
cells into amyloid. We also raise the possibility that the two VQIINK structures 
represent amyloid polymorphs of tau that may account for a subset of prion-like 
strains of tau.

DOI: 10.1038/nchem.2889
PMCID: PMC5784779
PMID: 29359764 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Methods Cell Biol. 2017;141:3-26. doi: 10.1016/bs.mcb.2017.06.001. Epub 2017 Jul 
24.

Expression and isolation of recombinant tau.

Best RL(1), Chung PJ(2), Benbow SJ(1), Savage A(3), LaPointe NE(4), Safinya 
CR(2), Feinstein SC(5).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Research Institute, University of California, Santa Barbara, 
Santa Barbara, CA, United States; University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa 
Barbara, CA, United States.
(2)University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA, United States.
(3)Neuroscience Research Institute, University of California, Santa Barbara, 
Santa Barbara, CA, United States; College of Creative Studies, University of 
California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA, United States.
(4)Neuroscience Research Institute, University of California, Santa Barbara, 
Santa Barbara, CA, United States.
(5)Neuroscience Research Institute, University of California, Santa Barbara, 
Santa Barbara, CA, United States; University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa 
Barbara, CA, United States; College of Creative Studies, University of 
California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA, United States. Electronic address: 
feinstei@lifesci.ucsb.edu.

In this chapter, we describe methods for the purification of both untagged and 
polyhistidine-tagged tau protein. These protocols utilize a bacterial expression 
system to produce the tau isoform of interest, followed by heat treatment and 
column chromatography to separate tau from impurities. These techniques yield a 
biochemically pure protein with which to pursue any number of questions 
regarding the mechanisms of tau action.

© 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.mcb.2017.06.001
PMID: 28882309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Methods Mol Biol. 2012;849:473-91. doi: 10.1007/978-1-61779-551-0_32.

Biochemical isolation of insoluble tau in transgenic mouse models of 
tauopathies.

Julien C(1), Bretteville A, Planel E.

Author information:
(1)Axe Neurosciences, Centre Hospitalier de l'Université Laval, Québec, QC, 
Canada.

Tau is a highly soluble microtubule-associated protein (MAP) that is abundant in 
the central nervous system and expressed mainly in neuronal axons. Intracellular 
aggregates of insoluble tau protein are present in a group of neurodegenerative 
diseases called tauopathies, which include Alzheimer's disease. Numerous 
transgenic mouse models of tauopathies have been produced in the last decade, 
and analysis of insoluble tau in these animals has provided a powerful tool to 
understand the development of tau pathology. In this short chapter, we aim at 
reviewing the two main isolation methods, sarkosyl and formic acid extraction 
(and their variations), used for the biochemical isolation of insoluble tau in 
transgenic mouse models of tauopathy, and discuss their advantages and 
drawbacks.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-61779-551-0_32
PMID: 22528110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Cell Sci. 1992 Jun;102 ( Pt 2):227-37. doi: 10.1242/jcs.102.2.227.

Expression of tau protein in non-neuronal cells: microtubule binding and 
stabilization.

Lee G(1), Rook SL.

Author information:
(1)Program in Neuroscience, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.

The microtubule-associated protein tau is a developmentally regulated family of 
neuronal phosphoproteins that promotes the assembly and stabilization of 
microtubules. The carboxy-terminal half of the protein contains three copies of 
an imperfectly repeated sequence; this region has been found to bind 
microtubules in vitro. In addition, a fourth copy of the repeat has been found 
in adult-specific forms of tau protein. To examine the structure and function of 
tau protein in vivo, we have transiently expressed fetal and adult forms of tau 
protein and tau protein fragments in tissue culture cells. Biochemical analysis 
reveals full-length products with heterogeneity in post-translational 
modification synthesized in the cells. Immunofluorescent staining of transfected 
cells shows that, under our conditions, sequences on both sides of the repeat 
region are required for in vivo microtubule co-localization. These additional 
regions may be required either for enhancing microtubule contacts or for proper 
protein folding in the cell. In our expression system, the bundling of cellular 
microtubules occurs only in transfections using four-repeat tau constructs; any 
four-repeat construct capable of binding is also able to induce bundling. Our 
data suggest that the presence of bundles is correlated with enhanced 
microtubule stability; factors that increase stability such as higher levels of 
tau protein expression or the presence of the fourth repeat, increase the 
fraction of transfected cells showing bundles. Finally, the presence of tau 
protein in the cell allows all interphase microtubules to become acetylated, a 
post-translational modification usually reserved for a subset of stable cellular 
microtubules.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.102.2.227
PMID: 1400630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2019 Mar 1;7(1):31. doi: 10.1186/s40478-019-0682-x.

The elusive tau molecular structures: can we translate the recent breakthroughs 
into new targets for intervention?

Fichou Y(1), Al-Hilaly YK(2)(3), Devred F(4), Smet-Nocca C(5), Tsvetkov PO(4), 
Verelst J(6), Winderickx J(6), Geukens N(7), Vanmechelen E(8), Perrotin A(9), 
Serpell L(2), Hanseeuw BJ(10)(11), Medina M(12)(13), Buée L(14), Landrieu I(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of chemistry and biochemistry, University of California Santa 
Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA, 93106, USA.
(2)Dementia Research group, School of Life Sciences, University of Sussex, 
Falmer, E Sussex, BN1 9QG, UK.
(3)Chemistry Department, Science College, Mustansiriyah University, Baghdad, 
Iraq.
(4)Aix-Marseille University, CNRS, INP, Inst Neurophysiopathol, Fac Pharm, 
Marseille, France.
(5)University of Lille, CNRS, UMR8576, 59000, Lille, France.
(6)Functional Biology, KU Leuven, Kasteelpark Arenberg 31, Box 2433, 3001, 
Heverlee, Belgium.
(7)Pharmabs, KU Leuven, Herestraat 49, box 820, B 3000, Leuven, Belgium.
(8)ADx NeuroSciences NV, Technologiepark Zwijnaarde 94, 9052, Ghent, Belgium.
(9)Life Molecular Imaging, Berlin, Germany.
(10)Neurology Department, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, 10 Avenue 
Hippocrate, 1200 Brussels, Belgium.
(11)Gordon Center for Medical Imaging, Radiology Department, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(12)CIBERNED (Network Center for Biomedical Research in Neurodegenerative 
Diseases), Madrid, Spain.
(13)CIEN Foundation, Queen Sofia Foundation Alzheimer Center, Madrid, Spain.
(14)University of Lille, Inserm, CHU-Lille, UMRS1172, 59000, Lille, France. 
luc.buee@inserm.fr.
(15)University of Lille, CNRS, UMR8576, 59000, Lille, France. 
lsabelle.landrieu@univ-lille.fr.

Insights into tau molecular structures have advanced significantly in recent 
years. This field has been the subject of recent breakthroughs, including the 
first cryo-electron microscopy structures of tau filaments from Alzheimer's and 
Pick's disease inclusions, as well as the structure of the repeat regions of tau 
bound to microtubules. Tau structure covers various species as the tau protein 
itself takes many forms. We will here address a range of studies that help to 
define the many facets of tau protein structures and how they translate into 
pathogenic forms. New results shed light on previous data that need now to be 
revisited in order to up-date our knowledge of tau molecular structure. Finally, 
we explore how these data can contribute the important medical aspects of this 
research - diagnosis and therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1186/s40478-019-0682-x
PMCID: PMC6397507
PMID: 30823892 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: COMPETING INTERESTS: JW declares that he is 
cofounder and shareholder of reMYND nv (Leuven, Belgium) and ADxNeurosciences 
(Ghent, Belgium). EV declares that he is cofounder and employee of 
ADxNeurosciences (Ghent, Belgium). AP is a Life Molecular Imaging (Berlin, 
Germany). LB declares that he is cofounder and shareholder of SPQI (Lille, 
France). Other authors declare that they have no competing interests. 
PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.


158. J Neurochem. 2004 Mar;88(6):1509-20. doi: 10.1046/j.1471-4159.2003.02287.x.

Pseudophosphorylation of tau protein alters its ability for self-aggregation.

Haase C(1), Stieler JT, Arendt T, Holzer M.

Author information:
(1)Paul Flechsig Institute of Brain Research, Department of Neuroanatomy, 
University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.

Filamentous tau protein deposits are a pathological hallmark of a group of 
neurodegenerative disorders (tauopathies). Tau protein in these aggregates is 
highly phosphorylated at different phosphorylation sites. Although tau filaments 
can be formed by heparin-induced aggregation of unphosphorylated recombinant 
tau, it is not known how tau phosphorylation modulates aggregation behaviour. 
Analysis of the effect of tau phosphorylation at defined single or multiple 
sites is hampered by the low specificity of protein kinases and the highly 
dynamic turnover of phosphorylation in vivo. To overcome this problem we 
employed site-directed mutagenesis to convert serine and threonine to aspartic 
acid or glutamic acid, which introduce a negative charge and conformational 
change that mimic phosphorylation. We tested 14 different mutated tau proteins 
for their propensity for self-aggregation and formation of tau filaments. Tau 
aggregation was monitored with thioflavin S fluorescence in the presence of 
different inducers such as heparin, Al3+, Fe2+ and Fe3+. We found that mutations 
in the N-terminal portion up to amino acid 208 mainly suppress tau aggregation, 
whereas mutations in the C-terminal region mainly lead to an enhanced 
aggregation. Mutations in the middle portion of tau showed a mixed picture of 
suppression and enhancement of aggregation. A single amino acid change Ser422Glu 
has aggregation-favouring properties with all four inducers.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1471-4159.2003.02287.x
PMID: 15009652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2019;1184:35-45. doi: 10.1007/978-981-32-9358-8_3.

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy Insights into Tau Structure in Solution: 
Impact of Post-translational Modifications.

Danis C(1), Dupré E(1), Hanoulle X(1), Landrieu I(2), Lasorsa A(1), Neves JF(1), 
Schneider R(1), Smet-Nocca C(1).

Author information:
(1)Université de Lille, CNRS, UMR 8576 - UGSF - Unité de Glycobiologie 
Structurale et Fonctionnelle, Lille, France.
(2)Université de Lille, CNRS, UMR 8576 - UGSF - Unité de Glycobiologie 
Structurale et Fonctionnelle, Lille, France. isabelle.landrieu@univ-lille.fr.

Although Tau is an intrinsically disordered protein, some level of structure can 
still be defined, corresponding to short stretches of dynamic secondary 
structures and a preferential global fold described as an ensemble of 
conformations. These structures can be modified by Tau phosphorylation, and 
potentially other post-translational modifications. The analytical capacity of 
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy provides the advantage of offering 
a residue-specific view of these modifications, allowing to link specific sites 
to a particular structure. The cis or trans conformation of X-Proline peptide 
bonds is an additional characteristic parameter of Tau structure that is 
targeted and modified by prolyl cis/trans isomerases. The challenge in molecular 
characterization of Tau lies in being able to link structural parameters to 
functional consequences in normal functions and dysfunctions of Tau, including 
potential misfolding on the path to aggregation and/or perturbation of the 
interactions of Tau with its many molecular partners. Phosphorylation of Ser and 
Thr residues has the potential to impact the local and global structure of Tau.

DOI: 10.1007/978-981-32-9358-8_3
PMID: 32096026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J Alzheimers Dis. 2017;55(1):411-419. doi: 10.3233/JAD-160542.

Tau Proteins Cross the Blood-Brain Barrier.

Banks WA(1)(2), Kovac A(3)(4), Majerova P(3)(5), Bullock KM(1), Shi M(6), Zhang 
J(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Research and Development, Veterans Affairs Puget Sound Health Care System, 
Seattle, WA, USA.
(2)Division of Gerontology and Geriatric Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(3)Institute of Neuroimmunology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovak 
Republic.
(4)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, The University of Veterinary 
Medicine and Pharmacy, Kosice, Slovak Republic.
(5)AXON Neuroscience SE, Bratislava, Slovak Republic.
(6)Department of Pathology, University of Washington School of Medicine, 
Seattle, WA, USA.
(7)Department of Pathology, Peking University Health Science Center and Peking 
University Third Hospital, Beijing, China.

Tauopathies are a hallmark of many neurodegenerative diseases, including 
Alzheimer's disease and traumatic brain injuries. It has been demonstrated that 
amyloid-beta peptides, alpha-synuclein, and prion proteins cross the blood-brain 
barrier (BBB), contributing to their abilities to induce disease. Very little is 
known about whether tau proteins can cross the BBB. Here we systematically 
characterized several key forms of tau proteins to cross the BBB, including 
Tau-441 (2N4R), Tau-410 (2N3R), truncated tau 151-391 (0N4R), and truncated tau 
121-227. All of these tau proteins crossed the BBB readily and bidirectonally; 
however, only Tau-410 had a saturable component to its influx. The tau proteins 
also entered the blood after their injection into the brain, with Tau 121-227 
having the slowest exit from brain. The tau proteins varied in regards to their 
enzymatic stability in brain and blood and in their peripheral pharmacokinetics. 
These results show that blood-borne tau proteins could contribute to brain 
tauopathies. The result also suggest that the CNS can contribute to blood levels 
of tau, raising the possibility that, as suggested for other misfolded proteins, 
blood levels of tau proteins could be used as a biomarker of CNS disease.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-160542
PMID: 27662303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Curr Alzheimer Res. 2011 Sep;8(6):659-65. doi: 10.2174/156720511796717177.

Tau oligomers as potential targets for immunotherapy for Alzheimer's disease and 
tauopathies.

Lasagna-Reeves CA(1), Castillo-Carranza DL, Jackson GR, Kayed R.

Author information:
(1)George P and Cynthia Woods Mitchell Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, 
Department of Neurology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX 
77555-0857, USA.

The aggregation and accumulation of the microtubule-associated protein (Tau) is 
a pathological hallmark of Alzheimer disease (AD) and many neurodegenerative 
diseases. For a long time research has focused on neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) 
and other large meta-stable inclusions composed of aggregated 
hyperphosphorylated tau protein. The correlation between these structures and 
disease progression produced conflicting results; moreover, the mechanism of 
their formation remains poorly understood. Lately, the significance and toxicity 
of NFTs have been challenged and a new aggregated tau entity has emerged as the 
true pathogenic species in tauopathies and a possible mediator of Aβ toxicity in 
AD; specifically, aggregates of a size intermediate between monomers and NFTs 
the so-called tau oligomers. Tremendous efforts have been devoted toward the 
optimization of a safe vaccine for AD by targeting Aβ peptide; despite the 
disappointing results, these studies produced a wealth of useful knowledge, 
which should be considered in developing tau-based immunotherapy. Herein, we 
discuss the evidence supporting the critical role of tau oligomers in AD, the 
potential and challenges for targeting them by immunotherapy as a novel approach 
for AD treatment.

DOI: 10.2174/156720511796717177
PMID: 21605039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Am Soc Mass Spectrom. 2019 Jan;30(1):16-23. doi: 10.1007/s13361-018-2027-6. 
Epub 2018 Jul 30.

Native Top-Down Mass Spectrometry and Ion Mobility Spectrometry of the 
Interaction of Tau Protein with a Molecular Tweezer Assembly Modulator.

Nshanian M(1), Lantz C(1), Wongkongkathep P(1)(2), Schrader T(3), Klärner FG(3), 
Blümke A(4), Despres C(5), Ehrmann M(4), Smet-Nocca C(5), Bitan G(6)(7), Loo 
JA(8)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California-Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)Institute of Chemistry, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.
(4)Center of Medical Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology, University of 
Duisburg-Essen, Universitaetsstrasse, Essen, Germany.
(5)UMR 8576 - UGSF - Unité de Glycobiologie Structurale et Fonctionnelle, 
Université Lille, CNRS, 59000, Lille, France.
(6)Department of Neurology and Brain Research Institute, David Geffen School of 
Medicine, University of California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA.
(7)Molecular Biology Institute, University of California-Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, CA, 90095, USA.
(8)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California-Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA. JLoo@chem.ucla.edu.
(9)Molecular Biology Institute, University of California-Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, CA, 90095, USA. JLoo@chem.ucla.edu.
(10)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California-Los Angeles, 
Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA. JLoo@chem.ucla.edu.

Erratum in
    J Am Soc Mass Spectrom. 2019 Mar 1;30(3):561.

Native top-down mass spectrometry (MS) and ion mobility spectrometry (IMS) were 
applied to characterize the interaction of a molecular tweezer assembly 
modulator, CLR01, with tau, a protein believed to be involved in a number of 
neurodegenerative disorders, including Alzheimer's disease. The tweezer CLR01 
has been shown to inhibit aggregation of amyloidogenic polypeptides without 
toxic side effects. ESI-MS spectra for different forms of tau protein 
(full-length, fragments, phosphorylated, etc.) in the presence of CLR01 indicate 
a primary binding stoichiometry of 1:1. The relatively high charging of the 
protein measured from non-denaturing solutions is typical of intrinsically 
disordered proteins, such as tau. Top-down mass spectrometry using electron 
capture dissociation (ECD) is a tool used to determine not only the sites of 
post-translational modifications but also the binding site(s) of non-covalent 
interacting ligands to biomolecules. The intact protein and the 
protein-modulator complex were subjected to ECD-MS to obtain sequence 
information, map phosphorylation sites, and pinpoint the sites of inhibitor 
binding. The ESI-MS study of intact tau proteins indicates that top-down MS is 
amenable to the study of various tau isoforms and their post-translational 
modifications (PTMs). The ECD-MS data point to a CLR01 binding site in the 
microtubule-binding region of tau, spanning residues K294-K331, which includes a 
six-residue nucleating segment PHF6 (VQIVYK) implicated in aggregation. 
Furthermore, ion mobility experiments on the tau fragment in the presence of 
CLR01 and phosphorylated tau reveal a shift towards a more compact structure. 
The mass spectrometry study suggests a picture for the molecular mechanism 
of the modulation of protein-protein interactions in tau by CLR01. Graphical 
Abstract ᅟ.

DOI: 10.1007/s13361-018-2027-6
PMCID: PMC6320309
PMID: 30062477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2024;42(23):12761-12775. doi: 
10.1080/07391102.2023.2273433. Epub 2023 Oct 25.

The induction of tau aggregation is restricted by sulfamethoxazole and provides 
new information regarding the use of the drug.

Akbari V(1), Bahramikia S(1), Jalalvand AR(2), Mehrabi M(3), Ezati M(4), 
Khodarahmi R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Basic Sciences, Lorestan University, 
Khorramabad, Iran.
(2)Research Center of Oils and Fats, Research Institute for Health Technology, 
Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences, Kermanshah, Iran.
(3)Medical Biology Research Center, Health Technology Institute, Kermanshah 
University of Medical Sciences (KUMS), Kermanshah, Iran.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Tarbiat Modares 
University, Tehran, Iran.

The aggregation of tau protein in the form of paired helical filament (PHF) 
leads to the breakdown of microtubule structure and the development of 
neurodegenerative disorders, such as Alzheimer's disease. Therefore, inhibiting 
tau protein aggregation is a potential strategy for preventing the progression 
of these disorders. In this study, sulfamethoxazole (SMZ), an antibiotic that 
easily crosses the blood-brain barrier and interacts with tau protein, was 
tested for its ability to inhibit tau aggregation in vitro. Various 
multi-spectroscopic techniques including XRD, LDH cytotoxicity colorimetric 
assay, and microscopic imaging were employed. The results showed that SMZ 
effectively interacts with tau protein through hydrogen and van der Waals 
interactions. It also effectively inhibited tau protein aggregation in vitro and 
significantly reduced toxicity in the SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cell line. Molecular 
docking and MD simulation results suggested that SMZ may reduce tau protein 
aggregation by interacting with the PHF6 motif. Overall, these findings indicate 
that SMZ has therapeutic potential as a tau protein aggregation inhibitor, at 
least under in vitro conditions. These findings suggest that SMZ has potential 
as a treatment for neurodegenerative disorders involving tau protein 
aggregation. However, further research is needed to confirm these results and 
assess the effectiveness of SMZ in animal models and clinical 
trials.Communicated by Ramaswamy H. Sarma.

DOI: 10.1080/07391102.2023.2273433
PMID: 37878050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Trends Neurosci. 2009 Mar;32(3):150-9. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2008.11.007. Epub 
2009 Jan 21.

Tau pathophysiology in neurodegeneration: a tangled issue.

Spires-Jones TL(1), Stoothoff WH, de Calignon A, Jones PB, Hyman BT.

Author information:
(1)MassGeneral Institute for Neurodegenerative Disease, Massachusetts General 
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

Neurodegenerative tauopathies are marked by their common pathologic feature of 
aggregates formed of hyperphosphorylated tau protein, which are associated with 
synapse and neuronal loss. Changes in tau conformation result in both loss of 
normal function and gain of fibrillogenicity that leads to aggregation. Here, we 
discuss the pathophysiology of tau and emerging evidence of how changes in this 
protein might ultimately lead to neuronal death. In particular, based on recent 
evidence, we propose that a non-apoptotic caspase-associated form of death is 
occurring in tauopathy.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tins.2008.11.007
PMID: 19162340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Neurosci Bull. 2014 Apr;30(2):367-77. doi: 10.1007/s12264-013-1411-2. Epub 2014 
Mar 14.

Regulation of alternative splicing of tau exon 10.

Qian W(1), Liu F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, Nantong 
University, Nantong, 226001, China.

The neuronal microtubule-associated protein tau is abnormally 
hyperphosphorylated and aggregated into neurofibrillary tangles in the brains of 
individuals with Alzheimer's disease and related neurodegenerative disorders. 
The adult human brain expresses six isoforms of tau generated by alternative 
splicing of exons 2, 3, and 10 of its pre-mRNA. Exon 10 encodes the second 
microtubule-binding repeat of tau. Its alternative splicing produces tau 
isoforms with either three or four microtubule-binding repeats, termed 3R-tau 
and 4Rtau. In the normal adult human brain, the level of 3R-tau is approximately 
equal to that of 4R-tau. Several silent and intronic mutations of the tau gene 
associated with FTDP-17T (frontotemporal dementia with Parkinsonism linked to 
chromosome 17 and specifically characterized by tau pathology) only disrupt exon 
10 splicing, but do not influence the primary sequence of the tau protein. Thus, 
abnormal exon 10 splicing is sufficient to cause neurodegeneration and dementia. 
Here, we review the regulation of tau exon 10 splicing by cis-elements and 
trans-factors and summarize all the mutations associated with FTDP-17T and 
related tauopathies. The findings suggest that correction of exon 10 splicing 
may be a potential target for tau exon 10 splicing-related tauopathies.

DOI: 10.1007/s12264-013-1411-2
PMCID: PMC5562657
PMID: 24627328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Biochem Soc Trans. 2010 Aug;38(4):977-80. doi: 10.1042/BST0380977.

Tau phosphorylation in hippocampus results in toxic gain-of-function.

Avila J(1), Gómez de Barreda E, Engel T, Lucas JJ, Hernández F.

Author information:
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa CSIC-UAM, Campus de la Universidad 
Autónoma de Madrid, 28049 Madrid, Spain. javila@cbm.uam.es

The MAP (microtubule-associated protein) tau binds to tubulin, the main 
component of MTs (microtubules), which results in the stabilization of MT 
polymers. Tau binds to the C-terminal of tubulin, like other MAPs (including 
motor proteins such as kinesin) and it therefore may compete with these proteins 
for the same binding site in the tubulin molecule. In pathological conditions, 
tau is the main component of aberrant protein aggregates found in 
neurodegenerative disorders known as tauopathies where tau is present in its 
hyperphosphorylated form. GSK3 (glycogen synthase kinase 3, also known as tau 
kinase I) has been described as one of the main kinases involved in tau 
modifications. We have analysed the role of phospho-tau as a neurotoxic agent. 
We have analysed a transgenic mouse model which overexpresses GSK3beta. In this 
transgenic mouse, a clear degeneration of the dentate gyrus, which increases 
with age, was found. In a double transgenic mouse, which overexpresses GSK3 and 
tau at the same time, dentate gyrus degeneration was dramatically increased. 
This result may suggest that phospho-tau may be toxic inside neurons of the 
dentate gyrus. Once neuronal degeneration takes place, intracellular tau is 
secreted to the extracellular space. The present review discusses the toxicity 
of this extracellular tau for surrounding neurons.

DOI: 10.1042/BST0380977
PMID: 20658988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Nervenarzt. 2019 Sep;90(9):891-897. doi: 10.1007/s00115-019-0758-7.

[Anti-tau therapies-what can be expected?].

[Article in German]

Fließbach K(1)(2), McCormick C(1)(2), Kaulen B(1)(2), Schneider A(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Klinik für Neurodegenerative Erkrankungen und Gerontopsychiatrie, 
Universitätsklinikum Bonn Venusberg, Campus 1, 53127, Bonn, Deutschland.
(2)Deutsches Zentrum für Neurodegenerative Erkrankungen, DZNE, Bonn, 
Deutschland.
(3)Klinik für Neurodegenerative Erkrankungen und Gerontopsychiatrie, 
Universitätsklinikum Bonn Venusberg, Campus 1, 53127, Bonn, Deutschland. 
anja.schneider@dzne.de.
(4)Deutsches Zentrum für Neurodegenerative Erkrankungen, DZNE, Bonn, 
Deutschland. anja.schneider@dzne.de.

Alzheimer's disease is histopathologically characterized by aggregation of two 
proteins, namely amyloid-beta peptide and tau protein. Whereas former 
intervention trials focused particularly on the amyloid pathology, recent 
therapeutic approaches are directed against the tau pathology. This article 
summarizes recent progress in anti-tau therapies, especially therapies based on 
anti-tau immunization and antisense oligonucleotides (ASO).

DOI: 10.1007/s00115-019-0758-7
PMID: 31332452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Curr Mol Pharmacol. 2022;15(2):361-379. doi: 10.2174/1874467214666210906125318.

Alzheimer's Disease and other Tauopathies: Exploring Efficacy of Medicinal 
Plant-derived Compounds in Alleviating Tau-mediated Neurodegeneration.

Durairajan SSK(1), Selvarasu K(1), Bera MR(1), Rajaram K(1), Iyaswamy A(2), Li 
M(2).

Author information:
(1)Mycobiology and Neurodegenerative Disease Research Lab, Department of 
Microbiology, School of Life Sciences, Central University of Tamil Nadu, 
Tiruvarur, India.
(2)Mr. & Mrs. Ko Chi-Ming Centre for Parkinson's Disease Research, School of 
Chinese Medicine, Hong Kong Baptist University, Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong SAR, 
China.

Alzheimer's disease (AD), a major form of dementia, has been reported to affect 
more than 50 million people worldwide. It is characterized by the presence of 
amyloid-β (Aβ) plaques and hyperphosphorylated Tau-associated neurofibrillary 
tangles in the brain. Apart from AD, microtubule (MT)-associated protein Tau is 
also involved in other neurodegenerative diseases called tauopathies, including 
Pick's disease, frontotemporal lobar degeneration, progressive supranuclear 
palsy, and corticobasal degeneration. The recent unsuccessful phase III clinical 
trials related to Aβ- targeted therapeutic drugs have indicated that alternative 
targets, such as Tau, should be studied to discover more effective and safer 
drugs. Recent drug discovery approaches to reduce AD-related Tau pathologies are 
primarily based on blocking Tau aggregation, inhibiting Tau phosphorylation, 
compensating impaired Tau function with MT-stabilizing agents, and targeting the 
degradation pathways in neuronal cells to degrade Tau protein aggregates. Owing 
to several limitations of the currently available Tau-directed drugs, further 
studies are required to generate further effective and safer Tau-based 
disease-modifying drugs. Here, we review the studies focused on medicinal plant- 
derived compounds capable of modulating the Tau protein, which is significantly 
elevated and hyperphosphorylated in AD and other tauopathies. We have mainly 
considered the studies focused on Tau protein as a therapeutic target. We have 
reviewed several pertinent papers retrieved from PubMed and ScienceDirect using 
relevant keywords, with a primary focus on the Tau-targeting compounds from 
medicinal plants. These compounds include indolines, phenolics, flavonoids, 
coumarins, alkaloids, and iridoids, which have been scientifically proven to be 
Tau-targeting candidates for the treatment of AD.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1874467214666210906125318
PMID: 34488602 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Sci China C Life Sci. 2006 Oct;49(5):473-9. doi: 10.1007/s11427-006-2019-9.

Study on interaction between microtubule associated protein tau and prion 
protein.

Han J(1), Zhang J, Yao H, Wang X, Li F, Chen L, Gao C, Gao J, Nie K, Zhou W, 
Dong X.

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory for Infectious Diseases Prevention and Control, National 
Institute for Viral Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese Center for Disease 
Control and Prevention, Beijing 100052, China.

Microtubule-associated protein tau is considered to play roles in many 
neurodegenerative diseases including some transmissible spongiform 
encephalopathies. To address the possible molecular linkage of prion protein 
(PrP) and tau, a GST-fusion segment of human tau covering the three-repeat 
region and various PrP segments was used in the tests of GST pull-down and 
immunoprecipitation. We found tau protein interacted with various style prion 
proteins such as native prion protein (PrPc) or protease-resistant isoform 
(PrPSc). Co-localization signals of tau and PrP were found in the CHO cell 
tranfected with both PrP and tau gene. The domain of interaction with tau was 
located at N-terminal of PrP (residues 23 to 91). The evidence of molecular 
interactions between PrP and tau protein highlights a potential role of tau in 
the biological function of PrP and the pathogenesis of TSEs.

DOI: 10.1007/s11427-006-2019-9
PMID: 17172055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Curr Alzheimer Res. 2010 Dec;7(8):656-64. doi: 10.2174/156720510793611592.

Tau in Alzheimer disease and related tauopathies.

Iqbal K(1), Liu F, Gong CX, Grundke-Iqbal I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurochemistry, New York State Institute for Basic Research in 
Developmental Disabilities, 1050 Forest Hill Road, Staten Island, New York 
10314-6399, USA. khalid.iqbal.ibr@gmail.com

Tau is the major microtubule associated protein (MAP) of a mature neuron. The 
other two neuronal MAPs are MAP1 and MAP2. An established function of MAPs is 
their interaction with tubulin and promotion of its assembly into microtubules 
and stabilization of the microtubule network. The microtubule assembly promoting 
activity of tau, a phosphoprotein, is regulated by its degree of 
phosphorylation. Normal adult human brain tau contains 2-3 moles phosphate/mole 
of tau protein. Hyperphosphorylation of tau depresses this biological activity 
of tau. In Alzheimer disease (AD) brain tau is ~three to four-fold more 
hyperphosphorylated than the normal adult brain tau and in this 
hyperphosphorylated state it is polymerized into paired helical filaments ([PHF) 
admixed with straight filaments (SF) forming neurofibrillary tangles. Tau is 
transiently hyperphosphorylated during development and during anesthesia and 
hypothermia but not to the same state as in AD brain. The abnormally 
hyperphosphorylated tau in AD brain is distinguished from transiently 
hyperphosphorylated tau by its ability (1) to sequester normal tau, MAP1 and 
MAP2 and disrupt microtubules, and (2) to self-assemble into PHF/SF. The 
cytosolic abnormally hyperphosphorylated tau, because of oligomerization, unlike 
normal tau, is sedimentable and on self-assembly into PHF/SF, loses its ability 
to sequester normal MAPs. Some of the tau in AD brain is truncated which also 
promotes its self-assembly. Tau mutations found in frontotemporal dementia 
apparently promote its abnormal hyperphosphorylation. Thus, the AD abnormally 
hyperphosphorylated tau (1) is distinguishable from both normal and transiently 
hyperphosphorylated taus, and (2) is inhibitory when in a cytosolic/oligomeric 
state but not when it is self-assembled into PHF/SF. Inhibition of abnormal 
hyperphosphorylation of tau offers a promising therapeutic target for AD and 
related tauopathies.

DOI: 10.2174/156720510793611592
PMCID: PMC3090074
PMID: 20678074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 May 27;105(21):7445-50. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0802036105. Epub 2008 May 21.

Complementary dimerization of microtubule-associated tau protein: Implications 
for microtubule bundling and tau-mediated pathogenesis.

Rosenberg KJ(1), Ross JL, Feinstein HE, Feinstein SC, Israelachvili J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, 
USA.

Tau is an intrinsically unstructured microtubule (MT)-associated protein capable 
of binding to and organizing MTs into evenly spaced parallel assemblies known as 
"MT bundles." How tau achieves MT bundling is enigmatic because each tau 
molecule possesses only one MT-binding region. To dissect this complex behavior, 
we have used a surface forces apparatus to measure the interaction forces of the 
six CNS tau isoforms when bound to mica substrates in vitro. Two types of 
measurements were performed for each isoform: symmetric configuration 
experiments measured the interactions between two tau-coated mica surfaces, 
whereas "asymmetric" experiments examined tau-coated surfaces interacting with a 
smooth bare mica surface. Depending on the configuration (of which there were 
12), the forces were weakly adhesive, strongly adhesive, or purely repulsive. 
The equilibrium spacing was determined mainly by the length of the tau 
projection domain, in contrast to the adhesion force/energy, which was 
determined by the number of repeats in the MT-binding region. Taken together, 
the data are incompatible with tau acting as a monomer; rather, they indicate 
that two tau molecules associate in an antiparallel configuration held together 
by an electrostatic "zipper" of complementary salt bridges composed of the 
N-terminal and central regions of each tau monomer, with the C-terminal 
MT-binding regions extending outward from each end of the dimeric backbone. This 
tau dimer determines the length and strength of the linker holding two MTs 
together and could be the fundamental structural unit of tau, underlying both 
its normal and pathological action.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0802036105
PMCID: PMC2396711
PMID: 18495933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


172. Brain Pathol. 1993 Jan;3(1):39-43. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.1993.tb00724.x.

The molecular and cellular biology of tau.

Kosik KS(1).

Author information:
(1)Harvard Medical School, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115.

Tau protein was a well-studied molecule before it was discovered in the 
Alzheimer neurofibrillary tangles. As a microtubule-associated protein (MAP), it 
continues to be of interest to microtubule biologists who have provided a rather 
rich knowledge about this protein. Recent work suggests that tau, a neuronal 
MAP, is capable of generating some features of an axonal shape and an axon-like 
organization of the cytoskeleton. The importance of tau in pathology stems from 
its relationship to Alzheimer paired helical filaments and dystrophic neurites. 
Tau was first believed to be a component of paired helical filaments based upon 
immunocytochemical grounds (1-6) and then conclusively demonstrated by protein 
chemical techniques (7-9). Most recently it was shown that bacterially expressed 
tau fragments from the microtubule-binding domain can self-assemble into paired 
helical filaments that resemble those from the Alzheimer brain (10).

DOI: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.1993.tb00724.x
PMID: 8269082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2024 Apr;25(5):571-584. doi: 
10.1080/14656566.2024.2345734. Epub 2024 Apr 27.

How can we manage progressive supranuclear palsy syndrome with pharmacotherapy?

Lozupone M(1), Dibello V(2)(3), Daniele A(4)(5), Solfrizzi V(2), Resta E(6), 
Panza F(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational Biomedicine and Neuroscience "DiBraiN", 
University of Bari Aldo Moro, Bari, Italy.
(2)Department of Interdisciplinary Medicine, "Cesare Frugoni" Internal and 
Geriatric Medicine and Memory Unit, University of Bari Aldo Moro, Bari, Italy.
(3)Department of Orofacial Pain and Dysfunction, Academic Centre for Dentistry 
Amsterdam (ACTA), University of Amsterdam and Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Neuroscience, Catholic University of Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy.
(5)Neurology Unit, IRCCS Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli, Rome, 
Italy.
(6)Translational Medicine and Health System Management, Department of Economy, 
University of Foggia, Foggia, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Tauopathies are a spectrum of clinicopathological 
neurodegenerative disorders with increased aggregates included in glia and/or 
neurons of hyperphosphorylated insoluble tau protein, a microtubule-associated 
protein. Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) is an atypical 
dopaminergic-resistant parkinsonian syndrome, considered as a primary tauopathy 
with possible alteration of tau isoform ratio, and tau accumulations 
characterized by 4 R tau species as the main neuropathological lesions.
AREAS COVERED: In the present review article, we analyzed and discussed viable 
disease-modifying and some symptomatic pharmacological therapeutics for PSP 
syndrome (PSPS).
EXPERT OPINION: Pharmacological therapy for PSPS may interfere with the 
aggregation process or promote the clearance of abnormal tau aggregates. A 
variety of past and ongoing disease-modifying therapies targeting tau in PSPS 
included genetic, microtubule-stabilizing compounds, anti-phosphorylation, and 
acetylation agents, antiaggregant, protein removal, antioxidant neuronal and 
synaptic growth promotion therapies. New pharmacological gene-based approaches 
may open alternative prevention pathways for the deposition of abnormal tau in 
PSPS such as antisense oligonucleotide (ASO)-based drugs. Moreover, kinases and 
ubiquitin-proteasome systems could also be viable targets.

DOI: 10.1080/14656566.2024.2345734
PMID: 38653731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Neurochem. 2020 Aug;154(3):316-329. doi: 10.1111/jnc.14940. Epub 2019 Dec 29.

Extracellular tau induces microglial phagocytosis of living neurons in cell 
cultures.

Pampuscenko K(1), Morkuniene R(1), Sneideris T(2), Smirnovas V(2), Budvytyte 
R(3), Valincius G(3), Brown GC(4), Borutaite V(1).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Institute, Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Kaunas, 
Lithuania.
(2)Institute of Biotechnology, Life Sciences Center, Vilnius University, 
Vilnius, Lithuania.
(3)Institute of Biochemistry, Life Sciences Center, Vilnius University, Vilnius, 
Lithuania.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

Tau is a microtubule-associated protein, found at high levels in neurons, and 
its aggregation is associated with neurodegeneration. Recently, it was found 
that tau can be actively secreted from neurons, but the effects of extracellular 
tau on neuronal viability are unclear. In this study, we investigated whether 
extracellular tau2N4R can cause neurotoxicity in primary cultures of rat brain 
neurons and glial cells. Cell cultures were examined for neuronal loss, death, 
and phosphatidylserine exposure, as well as for microglial phagocytosis by 
fluorescence microscopy. Aggregation of tau2N4R was assessed by atomic force 
microscopy. We found that extracellular addition of tau induced a gradual loss 
of neurons over 1-2 days, without neuronal necrosis or apoptosis, but 
accompanied by proliferation of microglia in the neuronal-glial co-cultures. Tau 
addition caused exposure of the 'eat-me' signal phosphatidylserine on the 
surface of living neurons, and this was prevented by elimination of the 
microglia or by inhibition of neutral sphingomyelinase. Tau also increased the 
phagocytic activity of pure microglia, and this was blocked by inhibitors of 
neutral sphingomyelinase or protein kinase C. The neuronal loss induced by tau 
was prevented by inhibitors of neutral sphingomyelinase, protein kinase C or the 
phagocytic receptor MerTK, or by eliminating microglia from the cultures. The 
data suggest that extracellular tau induces primary phagocytosis of stressed 
neurons by activated microglia, and identifies multiple ways in which the 
neuronal loss induced by tau can be prevented.

© 2019 International Society for Neurochemistry.

DOI: 10.1111/jnc.14940
PMID: 31834946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 Feb;1814(2):388-95. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbapap.2010.10.005. Epub 2010 Oct 23.

Pseudophosphorylation of tau protein directly modulates its aggregation 
kinetics.

Chang E(1), Kim S, Schafer KN, Kuret J.

Author information:
(1)Center of Molecular Neurobiology, Department of Molecular and Cellular 
Biochemistry, The Ohio State University College of Medicine, Columbus, OH 43210, 
USA.

Hyperphosphorylation of tau protein is associated with neurofibrillary lesion 
formation in Alzheimer's disease and other tauopathic neurodegenerative 
diseases. It fosters lesion formation by increasing the concentration of free 
tau available for aggregation and by directly modulating the tau aggregation 
reaction. To clarify how negative charge incorporation into tau directly affects 
aggregation behavior, the fibrillization of pseudophosphorylation mutant T212E 
prepared in a full-length four-repeat tau background was examined in vitro as a 
function of time and submicromolar tau concentrations using electron microscopy 
assay methods. Kinetic constants for nucleation and extension phases of 
aggregation were then estimated by direct measurement and mathematical 
simulation. Kinetic analysis revealed that pseudophosphorylation increased tau 
aggregation rate by increasing the rate of filament nucleation. In addition, it 
increased aggregation propensity by stabilizing mature filaments against 
disaggregation. The data suggest that incorporation of negative charge into the 
T212 site can directly promote tau filament formation at multiple steps in the 
aggregation pathway.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2010.10.005
PMCID: PMC3018534
PMID: 20974297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Biochemistry. 2013 Dec 17;52(50):9068-79. doi: 10.1021/bi401266n. Epub 2013 Nov 
22.

Phosphorylation of human Tau protein by microtubule affinity-regulating kinase 
2.

Schwalbe M(1), Biernat J, Bibow S, Ozenne V, Jensen MR, Kadavath H, Blackledge 
M, Mandelkow E, Zweckstetter M.

Author information:
(1)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE) , 37077 Göttingen, 
Germany.

Tau protein plays an important role in neuronal physiology and Alzheimer's 
neurodegeneration. Its abilities to aggregate abnormally, to bind to 
microtubules (MTs), and to promote MT assembly are all influenced by 
phosphorylation. Phosphorylation of serine residues in the KXGS motifs of Tau's 
repeat domain, crucial for MT interactions and aggregation, is facilitated most 
efficiently by microtubule-associated protein/microtubule affinity-regulating 
kinases (MARKs). Here we applied high-resolution nuclear magnetic resonance 
analysis to study the kinetics of phosphorylation of Tau by MARK2 and its impact 
on the structure and microtubule binding of Tau. We demonstrate that MARK2 binds 
to the N-terminal tail of Tau and selectively phosphorylates three major and 
five minor serine residues in the repeat domain and C-terminal tail. Structural 
changes induced by phosphorylation of Tau by MARK2 are highly localized in the 
proximity of the phosphorylation site and do not affect the global conformation, 
in contrast to phosphorylation in the proline-rich region. Furthermore, 
single-residue analysis of binding of Tau to MTs provides support for a model in 
which Tau's hot spots of MT interaction bind independently of each other and are 
differentially affected by phosphorylation.

DOI: 10.1021/bi401266n
PMID: 24251416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Methods Mol Biol. 2016;1345:101-12. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2978-8_7.

Analyzing Tau Aggregation with Electron Microscopy.

Huseby CJ(1), Kuret J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Interdisciplinary 
Biophysics Graduate Program, The Ohio State University College of Medicine, 
Columbus, OH, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, The Ohio State University 
College of Medicine, 108 Rightmire Hall, 1060 Carmack Road, Columbus, OH, 43210, 
USA. kuret.3@osu.edu.

Conversion of monomeric tau protein into filamentous aggregates is a defining 
event in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease. To gain insight into disease 
pathogenesis, the mechanisms that trigger and mediate tau aggregation are under 
intense investigation. Characterization efforts have relied primarily on 
recombinant tau protein preparations and high-throughput solution-based 
detection methods such as thioflavin-dye fluorescence and laser-light-scattering 
spectroscopies. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) is a static imaging tool 
that complements these approaches by detecting individual tau filaments at 
nanometer resolution. In doing so, it can provide unique insight into the 
quality, quantity, and composition of synthetic tau filament populations. Here 
we describe protocols for analysis of tau filament populations by TEM for 
purposes of dissecting aggregation mechanism.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2978-8_7
PMID: 26453208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Mol Biol. 2020 Aug 7;432(17):4891-4907. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2020.05.027. Epub 
2020 Jul 16.

Paired Helical Filament-Forming Region of Tau (297-391) Influences Endogenous 
Tau Protein and Accumulates in Acidic Compartments in Human Neuronal Cells.

Pollack SJ(1), Trigg J(1), Khanom T(1), Biasetti L(1), Marshall KE(1), Al-Hilaly 
YK(2), Rickard JE(3), Harrington CR(4), Wischik CM(4), Serpell LC(5).

Author information:
(1)Sussex Neuroscience, School of Life Sciences, University of Sussex, Falmer, 
E. Sussex, BN1 9QG, UK.
(2)Sussex Neuroscience, School of Life Sciences, University of Sussex, Falmer, 
E. Sussex, BN1 9QG, UK; Chemistry Department, College of Science, Mustansiriyah 
University, Baghdad, Iraq.
(3)Institute of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, AB25 2ZP, 
UK.
(4)Institute of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, AB25 2ZP, 
UK; TauRx Therapeutics Ltd., Aberdeen, AB24 5RP, UK.
(5)Sussex Neuroscience, School of Life Sciences, University of Sussex, Falmer, 
E. Sussex, BN1 9QG, UK. Electronic address: L.C.Serpell@sussex.ac.uk.

Assembly of tau protein into paired helical filaments and straight filaments is 
a key feature of Alzheimer's disease. Aggregation of tau has been implicated in 
neurodegeneration, cellular toxicity and the propagation, which accompanies 
disease progression. We have reported previously that a region of tau (297-391), 
referred to as dGAE, assembles spontaneously in physiological conditions to form 
paired helical filament-like fibres in vitro in the absence of additives such as 
heparin. This provides a valuable tool with which to explore the effects of tau 
in cell culture. Here we have studied the cellular uptake of soluble oligomeric 
and fibrillar forms of dGAE and examined the downstream consequences of tau 
internalisation into differentiated SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells using 
fluorescence and electron microscopy alongside structural and biochemical 
analyses. The assembled dGAE shows more acute cytotoxicity than the soluble, 
non-aggregated form. Conversely, the soluble form is much more readily 
internalised and, once within the cell, is able to associate with endogenous tau 
resulting in increased phosphorylation and aggregation of endogenous tau, which 
accumulates in lysosomal/endosomal compartments. It appears that soluble 
oligomeric forms are able to propagate tau pathology without being acutely 
toxic. The model system we have developed now permits the molecular mechanisms 
of propagation of tau pathology to be studied in vitro in a more physiological 
manner with a view to development of novel therapeutic approaches.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2020.05.027
PMCID: PMC7427330
PMID: 32681841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures S.J.P. was supported by a Sussex 
Neuroscience doctoral grant. K.E.M. was supported by Medical Research Council 
(MR/K022105/1) awarded to L.C.S. L.C.S. is supported by funding from Alzheimer's 
Research UK and Alzheimer's Society and Biotechnology and Biological Sciences 
Research Council (BB/S003657/1). K.E.M. and Y.K.A. were supported by funding 
from WisTa Laboratories Ltd. (PAR1596). Conflict of interest CRH and CMW hold 
Office in TauRx Therapeutics Ltd. and are inventors on patents owned by WisTa 
Laboratories Ltd., an affiliate of TauRx Therapeutics Ltd. KEM and YKA are 
funded by WisTa Laboratories Ltd., (PAR1596).


179. Neurobiol Aging. 1995 May-Jun;16(3):355-62; discussion 362-3. doi: 
10.1016/0197-4580(95)00025-a.

Tau domains, phosphorylation, and interactions with microtubules.

Mandelkow EM(1), Biernat J, Drewes G, Gustke N, Trinczek B, Mandelkow E.

Author information:
(1)Max-Planck-Unit for Structural Molecular Biology, Hamburg, Germany.

We consider the interactions of tau protein with microtubules from two points of 
view, phosphorylation and domain structure. Tau can be phosphorylated at many 
sites and by several kinases, notably by proline-directed kinases (MAPK, GSK-3, 
cdk5) which generate Alzheimer-like antibody epitopes. Other kinases 
phosphorylate Ser 262, a site that has a particularly pronounced influence on 
the affinity of tau for microtubules. All of these sites can be cleared by 
phosphatases PP-2a and calcineurin. The site Ser262 lies within the repeat 
domain of tau. However, when probing the domains of tau for their effects on 
microtubule binding, nucleation, assembly, or bundling, the repeat domain has 
only a weak influence. Whereas the repeat domain of tau binds to microtubules 
with low affinity, repeat-less tau binds strongly yet unproductively in terms of 
microtubule assembly. Productive binding of tau to microtubules depends on the 
combination of (some) repeats with the flanking regions, as if the flanking 
regions acted as "jaws" for the proper positioning of tau on the microtubule 
surface.

DOI: 10.1016/0197-4580(95)00025-a
PMID: 7566345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Anal Chem. 2019 Mar 5;91(5):3294-3301. doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.8b03992. Epub 
2019 Feb 14.

Fluorescence Lifetime Imaging of p-tau Protein in Single Neuron with a Highly 
Selective Fluorescent Probe.

Ge L(1), Tian Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, School of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering , East 
China Normal University , Dongchuan Road 500 , Shanghai 200241 , China.

Hyperphosphorylated tau (p-tau) protein is one of the key markers of Alzheimer's 
disease (AD). However, a lack of analytical methods for p-tau protein with high 
selectivity and accuracy is the bottleneck to understand the pathological 
processes of AD. In the present work, a highly selective fluorescence lifetime 
imaging microscopic (FLIM) probe (τ-p-tau) was rationally designed and developed 
for determination of p-tau protein, in which binuclear zinc units were designed 
as the recognition groups, and an improved cyanine was synthesized as the dye 
unit. The FLIM measurement is independent of the concentration of fluorescent 
probes, irradiation light sources, and measurement environments. Meanwhile, the 
developed τ-p-tau probe demonstrated strong affinity toward p-tau protein, thus 
enhancing the selectivity of determination of p-tau protein against Aβ, Aβ 
fibril, tau, protein kinases, ATP, and so on. The fluorescence lifetime of 
τ-p-tau probe showed a good linearity with the concentration of p-tau protein 
from 1.0 to 5.0 μM with a low detection limit of 85.15 ± 0.03 nM. The response 
time of the present probe for p-tau protein was estimated to be less than 6.2 s. 
Furthermore, taking the advantages of low toxicity and good biocompatibility, 
the developed probe was successfully applied to monitor the fluctuation of 
concentration of p-tau protein by FLIM imaging at single neuron level. It was 
found that the concentration of p-tau protein inside live neurons obviously 
changed upon oxidative stress.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.analchem.8b03992
PMID: 30706715 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Protein Expr Purif. 2021 Jun;182:105858. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2021.105858. Epub 
2021 Feb 25.

Chemometric modeling of the electrochemical data to investigate proline 
cis/trans isomeration effect on aggregation of Tau protein.

Khodarahmi R(1), Akbari V(2), Mohammadi S(3), Farshadnia T(2), Rahimabadi MM(2), 
Goicoechea HC(4), Jalalvand AR(5).

Author information:
(1)Medical Biology Research Center, Research Institute for Health Technology, 
Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences, Kermanshah, Iran. Electronic address: 
drrezakhodarahmi@gmail.com.
(2)Research Center of Oils and Fats, Research Institute for Health Technology, 
Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences, Kermanshah, Iran.
(3)Nano Drug Delivery Research Center, Research Institute for Health Technology, 
Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences, Kermanshah, Iran.
(4)Laboratorio de Desarrollo Analítico y Quimiometría (LADAQ), Cátedra de 
Química Analítica I, Universidad Nacional del Litoral, Ciudad Universitaria, CC 
242, S3000ZAA, Santa Fe, Argentina.
(5)Research Center of Oils and Fats, Research Institute for Health Technology, 
Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences, Kermanshah, Iran. Electronic address: 
ali.jalalvand1984@gmail.com.

Tau protein (Tau) is a proline-rich protein and in this work, we have developed 
a very interesting strategy based on combination of electrochemistry with 
chemometric methods to investigate proline cis/trans isomeration effect on the 
Tau aggregation. To achieve this goal, the proline residues at RTPPK motif have 
been replaced by alanine to generate RTPAK, RTAPK and RTAAK mutants of the Tau. 
Then, cyclic voltammetric (CV) responses of the Tau and RTPAK, RTAPK and RTAAK 
as its mutants in the presence of heparin (HEP) as an anionic inducing agent 
which could trigger aggregation of the Tau were recorded at physiological 
conditions every hour during 12 h. Therefore, 48 data sets of titrations were 
obtained which were handled by chemometric methods to extract useful information 
about aggregation of the Tau. The data were hard-modeled by EQUISPEC, SQUAD, 
REACTLAB and SPECFIT to extract useful quantitative information. Our results 
confirmed that the strength of the binding of the HEP with proteins was obeyed 
from Tau > RTPAK ~ RTAPK > RTAAK which confirmed that the aggregation of the 
proteins was obeyed from this order as well. Therefore, aggregation of the Tau 
is decreased by transforming Cis isomer to Trans even in the presence of an 
anionic inducing agent such as HEP which may have value for the treatment of 
Alzheimer's disease.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2021.105858
PMID: 33639278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Prion. 2012 Jul 1;6(3):223-33. doi: 10.4161/pri.19912. Epub 2012 Jul 1.

Is tau ready for admission to the prion club?

Hall GF(1), Patuto BA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Massachusetts Lowell, 
Lowell, MA, USA. Garth_Hall@uml.edu

Aggregation-prone proteins associated with neurodegenerative disease, such as α 
synuclein and β amyloid, now appear to share key prion-like features with 
mammalian prion protein, such as the ability to recruit normal proteins to 
aggregates and to translocate between neurons. These features may shed light on 
the genesis of stereotyped lesion development patterns in conditions such as 
Alzheimer disease and Lewy Body dementia. We discuss the qualifications of tau 
protein as a possible "prionoid" mediator of lesion spread based on recent 
characterizations of the secretion, uptake and transneuronal transfer of human 
tau isoforms in a variety of tauopathy models, and in human patients. In 
particular, we consider (1) the possibility that prionoid behavior of 
misprocessed tau in neurodegenerative disease may involve other 
aggregation-prone proteins, including PrP itself, and (2) whether "prionlike" 
tau lesion propagation might include mechanisms other than protein-protein 
templating.

DOI: 10.4161/pri.19912
PMCID: PMC3399531
PMID: 22561167 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Neurochem. 2007 Nov;103(4):1447-60. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2007.04834.x. 
Epub 2007 Aug 6.

The role of the VQIVYK peptide in tau protein phosphorylation.

Perez M(1), Santa-María I, Tortosa E, Cuadros R, Del Valle M, Hernández F, 
Moreno FJ, Avila J.

Author information:
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular "Severo Ochoa" CSIC/UAM, Facultad de Ciencias, 
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Cantoblanco, Madrid, Spain.

Although it remains unclear whether they are related to one another, tau 
aggregation and phosphorylation are the main pathological hallmarks of the 
neuronal disorders known as tauopathies. The capacity to aggregate is impaired 
in a variant of the tau 3R isoform that lacks residues 306-311 (nomenclature for 
the largest CNS tau isoform) and hence, we have taken advantage of this feature 
to study how phosphorylation and aggregation may be related as well as the role 
of this six amino acid peptide (VQIVYK). Through these analyses, we found that 
the phosphorylation of the tau variant was higher than that of the complete tau 
protein and that not only the deletion of these residues, but also the 
interaction of these residues, in tau 3R, with thioflavin-S augmented tau 
phosphorylation by glycogen synthase kinase 3. In addition, the binding of the 
peptide containing the residues 306-311 to the whole tau protein provoked an 
increase in tau phosphorylation. This observation could be physiologically 
relevant as may suggest that tau-tau interactions, through those residues, 
facilitate tau phosphorylation. In summary, our data indicate that deletion of 
residues VQIVYK, in tau protein produces an increase in tau phosphorylation, 
without tau aggregation, because the VQIVYK peptide, that favors aggregation, is 
missing. On the other hand, when the whole tau protein interacts with 
thioflavin-S or the peptide VQIVYK, an increase in both aggregation and 
phosphorylation occurs.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2007.04834.x
PMID: 17680993 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Talanta. 2008 Jan 15;74(4):1038-42. doi: 10.1016/j.talanta.2007.06.009. Epub 
2007 Jun 17.

Detection of Alzheimer's tau protein using localised surface plasmon 
resonance-based immunochip.

Vestergaard M(1), Kerman K, Kim DK, Ha MH, Tamiya E.

Author information:
(1)School of Materials Science, Japan Advanced Institute of Science and 
Technology, 1-1 Asahidai, Nomi City, Ishikawa 923-1292, Japan. munde@jaist.ac.jp

In this study, we present the detection of tau protein, at room temperature, 
using a multi-spot localised surface plasmon resonance (LSPR)-based immunochip. 
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of an immunochip for tau 
protein. The detection method includes fabrication of a gold-capped nanoparticle 
LSPR chip, formation and functionalisation of a self-assembled monolayer (SAM), 
immobilisation of a suitable linker, effective blocking of non-specific 
adsorption, immobilisation of a monoclonal anti-tau antibody (tau-mAb), and 
finally, the optimum conditions for the immuno-reaction between tau-mAb and the 
antigen were determined. The method has a high performance, enables detection of 
tau at 10pg/mL, lower than the cut-off value of 195pg/mL (for AD) for tau 
protein in cerebral spinal fluid (CSF). Further, we demonstrated selectivity of 
the technique by showing that the introduction of bovine serum albumin (BSA), 
perhaps the most abundant protein component in serum and CSF, does not interfere 
with the detection of tau. This method also offers a potential platform for 
studying tau interactions with other proteins and/or potential drug candidates 
and could also be easily adapted for detecting phosphorylated tau and other AD 
biomarkers.

DOI: 10.1016/j.talanta.2007.06.009
PMID: 18371746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Biochemistry. 2008 Sep 30;47(39):10345-53. doi: 10.1021/bi800900d. Epub 2008 Sep 
5.

Domain conformation of tau protein studied by solution small-angle X-ray 
scattering.

Mylonas E(1), Hascher A, Bernadó P, Blackledge M, Mandelkow E, Svergun DI.

Author information:
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Hamburg Outstation, Notkestrasse 85, 
22603 Hamburg, Germany.

Tau is one of the two main proteins involved in the pathology of Alzheimer's 
disease via formation of beta-sheet rich intracellular aggregates named paired 
helical filaments (PHFs). Given that tau is a natively unfolded protein with no 
folded core (even upon binding to physiological partners such as microtubules), 
its structural analysis by high-resolution techniques has been difficult. In 
this study, employing solution small-angle X-ray scattering from the full length 
isoforms and from a variety of deletion and point mutants the conformation of 
tau in solution is structurally characterized. A recently developed ensemble 
optimization method was employed to generate pools of random models and to 
select ensembles of coexisting conformations, which fitted simultaneously the 
scattering data from the full length protein and deletion mutants. The analysis 
of the structural properties of these selected ensembles allowed us to extract 
information about residual structure in different domains of the native protein. 
The short deletion mutants containing the repeat domain (considered the core 
constituent of the PHFs) are significantly more extended than random coils, 
suggesting an extended conformation of the repeat domain. The longer tau 
constructs are comparable in size with the random coils, pointing to long-range 
contacts between the N- and C-termini compensating for the extension of the 
repeat domain. Moreover, most of the aggregation-promoting mutants did not show 
major differences in structure from their wild-type counterparts, indicating 
that their increased pathological effect is triggered only after an aggregation 
core has been formed.

DOI: 10.1021/bi800900d
PMID: 18771286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Biol Chem. 2019 Mar 29;294(13):4956-4965. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.005980. Epub 
2019 Feb 4.

Heat shock protein 104 (HSP104) chaperones soluble Tau via a mechanism distinct 
from its disaggregase activity.

Zhang X(1)(2), Zhang S(1), Zhang L(3), Lu J(4), Zhao C(1)(2), Luo F(1)(2), Li 
D(4), Li X(5), Liu C(6).

Author information:
(1)From the Interdisciplinary Research Center on Biology and Chemistry, Shanghai 
Institute of Organic Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201210, 
China.
(2)the University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shijingshan District, 
Beijing 100049, China.
(3)the Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Structural Biology, 
Tsinghua-Peking Joint Center for Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences, 
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.
(4)the Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and Neuropsychiatric 
Disorders, Ministry of Education, Bio-X Institutes, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University, Shanghai 200030, China, and.
(5)the Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Structural Biology, 
Tsinghua-Peking Joint Center for Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences, 
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China, lixueming@tsinghua.edu.cn.
(6)From the Interdisciplinary Research Center on Biology and Chemistry, Shanghai 
Institute of Organic Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201210, 
China, liulab@sioc.ac.cn.

Heat shock protein 104 (HSP104) is a conserved AAA+ protein disaggregase, can 
disassemble the toxic aggregates formed by different amyloid proteins, and is 
protective in various animal models associated with amyloid-related diseases. 
Extensive studies have attempted to elucidate how HSP104 disassembles the 
aggregated form of clients. Here, we found that HSP104 exhibits a potent holdase 
activity that does not require energy, prevents the soluble form of amyloid 
clients from aggregating, and differs from HSP104's disaggregase activity. Using 
cryo-EM, NMR, and additional biophysical approaches, we found that HSP104 
utilizes its small subdomain of nucleotide-binding domain 2 (ssNBD2) to capture 
the soluble amyloid client (K19 of Tau) independent of its ATP hydrolysis 
activity. Our results indicate that HSP104 utilizes two fundamental distinct 
mechanisms to chaperone different forms of amyloid client and highlight the 
important yet previously unappreciated function of ssNBD2 in chaperoning amyloid 
client and thereby preventing pathological aggregation.

© 2019 Zhang et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.005980
PMCID: PMC6442063
PMID: 30718279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the contents of this article


187. J Proteome Res. 2020 Jun 5;19(6):2429-2442. doi: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.0c00137. 
Epub 2020 May 7.

Physiological Tau Interactome in Brain and Its Link to Tauopathies.

Sinsky J(1), Majerova P(1)(2), Kovac A(1)(2), Kotlyar M(3), Jurisica I(1)(3)(4), 
Hanes J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuroimmunology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Dubravska cesta 9, 
Bratislava 84510, Slovakia.
(2)AXON Neuroscience R&D Services SE, Dvorakovo nabrezie 10, Bratislava 811 02, 
Slovakia.
(3)Krembil Research Institute, UHN, 60 Leonard Avenue, Toronto, Ontario M5T 0S8, 
Canada.
(4)Departments of Medical Biophysics and Computer Science, University of 
Toronto, 27 King's College Circle, Toronto, Ontario ON M5S, Canada.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) and most of the other tauopathies are incurable 
neurodegenerative diseases with unpleasant symptoms and consequences. The common 
hallmark of all of these diseases is tau pathology, but its connection with 
disease progress has not been completely understood so far. Therefore, 
uncovering novel tau-interacting partners and pathology affected molecular 
pathways can reveal the causes of diseases as well as potential targets for the 
development of AD treatment. Despite the large number of known tau-interacting 
partners, a limited number of studies focused on in vivo tau interactions in 
disease or healthy conditions are available. Here, we applied an in vivo 
cross-linking approach, capable of capturing weak and transient protein-protein 
interactions, to a unique transgenic rat model of progressive tau pathology 
similar to human AD. We have identified 175 potential novel and known 
tau-interacting proteins by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry. Several of the most 
promising candidates for possible drug development were selected for validation 
by coimmunoprecipitation and colocalization experiments in animal and cellular 
models. Three proteins, Baiap2, Gpr37l1, and Nptx1, were confirmed as novel 
tau-interacting partners, and on the basis of their known functions and 
implications in neurodegenerative or psychiatric disorders, we proposed their 
potential role in tau pathology.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.0c00137
PMID: 32357304 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Vet J. 2013 Aug;197(2):253-8. doi: 10.1016/j.tvjl.2013.02.005. Epub 2013 Mar 13.

Cerebrospinal fluid tau protein as a biomarker for severity of spinal cord 
injury in dogs with intervertebral disc herniation.

Roerig A(1), Carlson R, Tipold A, Stein VM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Small Animal Medicine and Surgery, University of Veterinary 
Medicine Hannover, Hannover, Germany.

Comment in
    Vet J. 2013 Aug;197(2):113-4. doi: 10.1016/j.tvjl.2013.04.026.

Intervertebral disc herniation (IVDH) is a common cause of spinal cord injury 
(SCI) in dogs. Microtubule-associated protein tau derives predominantly from 
neurons and axons, making it a potential marker of neuronal injury. A 
retrospective study, including 51 dogs with thoracolumbar or cervical IVDH and 
12 clinically normal dogs, was designed to describe associations between 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) tau concentration, degree of neurological signs and 
motor functional recovery in dogs with IVDH. Signalment, degree of neurological 
dysfunction and outcome were recorded. Cisternal CSF tau values were determined 
by ELISA. Associations between CSF tau concentration and various clinical 
parameters were evaluated. Receiver-operating characteristics curve (ROC) 
analyses were performed to assess the validity of protein tau measurements. CSF 
tau concentrations were significantly higher in dogs showing plegia (median, 
79.9 pg/mL; range, 0-778.7 pg/mL; P=0.016) compared to healthy dogs and dogs 
with paresis (median, 30.1 pg/mL; range, 0-193.1 pg/mL; P=0.025). Plegic dogs 
that improved by one neurological grade within 1 week had significantly lower 
tau protein levels compared to plegic dogs that needed more time for recovery or 
did not show an improvement (P=0.008). A CSF tau concentration >41.3 pg/mL had a 
sensitivity of 86% and specificity of 83% to predict an unsuccessful outcome in 
plegic dogs based on ROC analysis (area under the curve, 0.887; P=0.007, 95% 
confidence interval [CI] 0.717-1.057). CSF protein tau levels are positively 
associated with the severity of spinal cord damage and may serve as a prognostic 
indicator in dogs with IVDH.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tvjl.2013.02.005
PMID: 23499240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Biophys Chem. 2021 Oct;277:106631. doi: 10.1016/j.bpc.2021.106631. Epub 2021 Jun 
4.

Comparison of the force fields on monomeric and fibrillar PHF6 of tau protein.

Li Y(1), Peng X(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Quantum Technology Research, Key Laboratory of Advanced 
Optoelectronic Quantum Architecture and Measurements (MOE), School of Physics, 
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China.
(2)Center for Quantum Technology Research, Key Laboratory of Advanced 
Optoelectronic Quantum Architecture and Measurements (MOE), School of Physics, 
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China; Beijing Academy of 
Quantum Information Sciences, Beijing 100193, China. Electronic address: 
xubiaopeng@bit.edu.cn.

The hexapeptide 306VQIVYK311 (PHF6) plays an important role in the aggregation 
of Tau protein, which is a hallmark of the Alzheimer's disease (AD). In this 
article, we systematically compare the effects of eight popular all-atom force 
fields on the monomeric and fibrillar PHF6 in the molecular dynamics (MD) 
simulations, which could be helpful in the computer-aided drug design against 
PHF6. We show that the fibrillar PHF6 prefers β-strand-like structures in all 
the force fields while the monomer has different structural preferences 
depending on the force fields. The interactions for stabilizing the fibril are 
further investigated. In the end, according to the interactions revealed by NMR 
and the stability of the fibril in the literature, we benchmark the force 
fields.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpc.2021.106631
PMID: 34116358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 May 30;21(11):3920. doi: 10.3390/ijms21113920.

Impact of the Hereditary P301L Mutation on the Correlated Conformational 
Dynamics of Human Tau Protein Revealed by the Paramagnetic Relaxation 
Enhancement NMR Experiments.

Kawasaki R(1), Tate SI(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematical and Life Sciences, Graduate School of Science, 
Hiroshima University, 1-3-1 Kagamiyama, Higashi-Hiroshima, Hiroshima 739-8526, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Mathematical and Life Sciences, Graduate School of the 
Integrated Sciences for Life, 1-3-1 Kagamiyama, Higashi-Hiroshima, Hiroshima 
739-8526, Japan.
(3)Research Center for the Mathematics on Chromatin Live Dynamics (RcMcD), 
Hiroshima University, 1-3-1, Kagamiyama, Higashi-Hiroshima, Hiroshima 739-8526, 
Japan.

Tau forms intracellular insoluble aggregates as a neuropathological hallmark of 
Alzheimer's disease. Tau is largely unstructured, which complicates the 
characterization of the tau aggregation process. Recent studies have 
demonstrated that tau samples two distinct conformational ensembles, each of 
which contains the soluble and aggregation-prone states of tau. A shift to 
populate the aggregation-prone ensemble may promote tau fibrillization. However, 
the mechanism of this ensemble transition remains elusive. In this study, we 
explored the conformational dynamics of a tau fragment by using paramagnetic 
relaxation enhancement (PRE) and interference (PRI) NMR experiments. The PRE 
correlation map showed that tau is composed of segments consisting of residues 
in correlated motions. Intriguingly, residues forming the β-structures in the 
heparin-induced tau filament coincide with residues in these segments, 
suggesting that each segment behaves as a structural unit in fibrillization. PRI 
data demonstrated that the P301L mutation exclusively alters the transiently 
formed tau structures by changing the short- and long-range correlated motions 
among residues. The transient conformations of P301L tau expose the amyloid 
motif PHF6 to promote tau self-aggregation. We propose the correlated motions 
among residues within tau determine the population sizes of the conformational 
ensembles, and perturbing the correlated motions populates the aggregation-prone 
form.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21113920
PMCID: PMC7313075
PMID: 32486218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.


191. Methods Cell Biol. 2017;141:45-64. doi: 10.1016/bs.mcb.2017.06.005. Epub 2017 
Jul 14.

Production of recombinant tau oligomers in vitro.

Combs B(1), Tiernan CT(1), Hamel C(1), Kanaan NM(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Human Medicine, Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, MI, 
United States.
(2)College of Human Medicine, Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, MI, 
United States; Neuroscience Program, Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, 
MI, United States; Hauenstein Neuroscience Center, Mercy Health Saint Mary's, 
Grand Rapids, MI, United States. Electronic address: nicholas.kanaan@hc.msu.edu.

The pathological aggregation of the tau protein is a common characteristic of 
many neurodegenerative diseases. There is strong interest in characterizing the 
potentially toxic nature of tau oligomers. These nonfibrillar, soluble multimers 
appear to be more toxic than neurofibrillary tangles made up of filamentous tau. 
However, reliable production, purification, and verification of tau oligomers 
can provide certain challenges. Here, we provide a series of methods that 
address these issues. First, recombinant tau is produced using Escherichia coli, 
purified through affinity, size-exclusion, and anion-exchange chromatography 
steps and quantified using an SDS Lowry protein quantitation assay. Aggregation 
of tau is induced using arachidonic acid, and oligomers are purified by 
centrifugation over a sucrose step gradient. Finally, we describe a sandwich 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay that utilizes the tau oligomer-specific TOC1 
antibody to confirm the presence of oligomeric tau. Together, these steps 
provide a very simple and reliable method for producing tau oligomers that can 
be used in downstream applications.

© 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.mcb.2017.06.005
PMCID: PMC5867531
PMID: 28882311 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Methods Mol Biol. 2024;2754:221-235. doi: 10.1007/978-1-0716-3629-9_13.

Quantification of Methylation and Phosphorylation Stoichiometry.

Ayoub CA(1), Moore KI(2), Kuret J(3).

Author information:
(1)Medical Scientist Training Program, Ohio State University College of 
Medicine, Columbus, OH, USA.
(2)Interdisciplinary Biophysics Graduate Program, Ohio State University College 
of Medicine, Columbus, OH, USA.
(3)Department of Biological Chemistry and Pharmacology, The Ohio State 
University College of Medicine, Columbus, OH, USA. kuret.3@osu.edu.

Tauopathies including Alzheimer's disease (AD) are neurodegenerative disorders 
accompanied by the conversion of functional forms of the microtubule associated 
protein Tau into non-functional aggregates. A variety of post-translational 
modifications (PTMs) on Tau precede or accompany the conversion, placing them in 
position to modulate Tau function as well as its propensity to aggregate. 
Although Tau PTMs can be characterized by their sites of modification, their 
total stoichiometry when summed over all sites also is an important metric of 
their potential impact on function. Here we provide a protocol for rapidly 
producing recombinant Tau with enzyme-specific PTMs at high stoichiometry in 
vitro and demonstrate its utility in the context of hyperphosphorylation. 
Additionally, protocols for estimating phosphorylation and methylation 
stoichiometry on Tau proteins isolated from any source are presented. Together 
these methods support experimentation on Tau PTM function over a wide range of 
experimental conditions.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-0716-3629-9_13
PMID: 38512670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Chem Biol Drug Des. 2019 Mar;93(3):242-253. doi: 10.1111/cbdd.13407. Epub 2018 
Oct 17.

Secondary structures transition of tau protein with intrinsically disordered 
proteins specific force field.

Dan A(1), Chen HF(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, Department of Bioinformatics 
and Biostatistics, SJTU-Yale Joint Center for Biostatistics, National 
Experimental Teaching Center for Life Sciences and Biotechnology, School of Life 
Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Shanghai Center for Bioinformation Technology, Shanghai, China.

Microtubule-associated Tau protein plays a key role in assembling microtubule 
and modulating the functional organization of the neuron and developing axonal 
morphology, growth, and polarity. The pathological Tau can aggregate into 
cross-beta amyloid as one of the hallmarks for Alzheimer's disease (AD). 
Therefore, one of the top priorities in AD research is to figure out the 
structural model of Tau aggregation and to screen the inhibitors. The latest 
generation intrinsically disordered protein specific force field ff14IDPSFF 
significantly improved the distributions of heterogeneous conformations for 
intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs). Here, the molecular dynamics (MD) 
simulations with three force fields of ff14SB, ff14IDPs, and ff14IDPSFF were 
employed to investigate the secondary structures transition of Tau (267-312) 
fragment. The results indicate that ff14IDPSFF can generate more heterogeneous 
conformers, and the predicted secondary structural distribution is closer to 
that of the experimental observation. In addition, predicted secondary chemical 
shifts from ff14IDPSFF are the most approach to those of experiment. Secondary 
structures transition kinetics for Tau(267-312) with ff14IDPSFF shows that the 
secondary structures were gradually transformed from α-helix to β-strand and the 
β-strand located at the regions of the residues 274-280 and residues 305-311. 
Besides, the driving force for the secondary structures transition of 
Tau(267-312) is mainly hydrophobic interactions which located at hexa-peptides 
275 VQIINK280 and 306 VQIVYK311 . Secondary structure transition of Tau protein 
can give insight into the aggregation mechanism for AD.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/cbdd.13407
PMID: 30259679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2022 Jul;40(10):4366-4375. doi: 
10.1080/07391102.2020.1856720. Epub 2020 Dec 15.

Role of cysteines in accelerating Tau filament formation.

Chidambaram H(1)(2), Chinnathambi S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Neurobiology Group, Division of Biochemical Sciences, CSIR-National Chemical 
Laboratory, Pune, India.
(2)Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad, India.

Alzheimer's disease is majorly associated with intracellular accumulation of Tau 
into paired helical filaments and tangles. The self-aggregated dimeric and 
oligomeric species of Tau formed are more toxic to neuronal cells and acts as 
seeds for filament formation. The two cysteine residues and the two hexapeptide 
regions of full-length Tau play a key role in initialization and filament 
formation during Tau aggregation. The role of cysteine residues in Tau 
aggregation has been studied by in-vitro aggregation assay that was measured by 
Thioflavin S fluorescence to observe the kinetics of aggregation. In this study, 
we have performed in-vitro aggregation assay with recombinant full-length Tau 
and the cysteine mutants to understand the mechanism of cysteine independent Tau 
aggregation. Here, we report that cysteine mutant full-length Tau can aggregate 
to form filaments under in-vitro conditions. To visualize the polymorphisms of 
Tau and cysteine mutants under different aggregation conditions anionic 
cofactor, heparin was employed. Wild-type Tau showed rapid aggregation to form 
oligomers and filaments. On the other hand, the cysteine mutant delayed the 
initial Tau aggregation. This indicates the importance of cysteine residues in 
accelerating initial Tau nucleation for its aggregation. The filament morphology 
of wild-type and cysteine mutant Tau has been characterized using transmission 
electron microscopy and high-resolution transmission electron 
microscopy.Communicated by Ramaswamy H. Sarma.

DOI: 10.1080/07391102.2020.1856720
PMID: 33317395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2024 Dec 2;63(49):e202407821. doi: 
10.1002/anie.202407821. Epub 2024 Oct 22.

dGAE(297-391) Tau Fragment Promotes Formation of Chronic Traumatic 
Encephalopathy-Like Tau Filaments.

Kitoka K(1), Lends A(1), Kucinskas G(2)(3), Bula AL(1), Krasauskas L(4), 
Smirnovas V(4), Zilkova M(5), Kovacech B(5), Skrabana R(5), Hritz J(2)(6), 
Jaudzems K(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Latvian Institute of Organic Synthesis, Aizkraukles 21, Riga LV, 1006, 
Latvia.
(2)CEITEC MU, Masaryk University, Kamenice 753/5, 625 00, Brno, Czech Republic.
(3)National Centre for Biomolecular Research, Faculty of Science, Masaryk 
University, Kamenice 5, 625 00, Brno, Czech Republic.
(4)Institute of Biotechnology, Life Sciences Center, Vilnius University, 
Sauletekio 7, Vilnius LT, 10257, Lithuania.
(5)Institute of Neuroimmunology, Slovak Academy of Sciences Dubravska, cesta 9, 
845 10, Bratislava, Slovakia.
(6)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Kamenice 5, 
625 00, Brno, Czech Republic.
(7)Department of Organic Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry, University of Latvia, 
Jelgavas 1, Riga LV, 1004, Latvia.

The microtubule-associated protein tau forms disease-specific filamentous 
aggregates in several different neurodegenerative diseases. In order to 
understand how tau undergoes misfolding into a specific filament type and to 
control this process for drug development purposes, it is crucial to study in 
vitro tau aggregation methods and investigate the structures of the obtained 
filaments at the atomic level. Here, we used the tau fragment dGAE, which 
aggregates spontaneously, to seed the formation of full-length tau filaments. 
The structures of dGAE and full-length tau filaments were investigated by 
magic-angle spinning (MAS) solid-state NMR, showing that dGAE allows propagation 
of a chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE)-like fold to the full-length tau. 
The obtained filaments efficiently seeded tau aggregation in HEK293T cells. This 
work demonstrates that in vitro preparation of disease-specific types of 
full-length tau filaments is feasible.

© 2024 The Authors. Angewandte Chemie International Edition published by 
Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/anie.202407821
PMCID: PMC11586700
PMID: 39183704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


196. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2006 Jul;1762(7):683-92. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbadis.2006.06.003. Epub 2006 Jun 9.

In vitro tau fibrillization: mapping protein regions.

Santa-María I(1), Pérez M, Hernández F, Muñoz V, Moreno FJ, Avila J.

Author information:
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular "Severo Ochoa" CSIC/UAM, Fac. Ciencias, Facultad 
de Ciencias, Campus de Cantoblanco, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Cantoblanco, 
28049 Madrid, Spain.

We have investigated the propensity to form fibrillar aggregates of a variety of 
fragments and variants of the tau protein under the influence of a tau 
fibrillization inducer: coenzyme Q(0). To better identify fibrillization 
hotspots, we compare the polymerization propensity of tau fragments containing 
the sequence of putative hotspots with that of tau variants with that same 
sequence deleted. We also investigate the effects of biologically occurring 
modifications such as phosphorylation and deamidation. We found that residues 
305 to 335 are essential for in vitro tau fibrillization. Residues 306 to 311 
facilitate in vitro assembly, but are not sufficient to mimic the in vivo 
fibrillization of tau. Furthermore, the propensity of the 306-311 sequence to 
form fibrils is highly decreased by chemical modifications of tyrosine 310 that 
are commonly found in vivo.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2006.06.003
PMID: 16891100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


197. NMR Biomed. 2024 Sep;37(9):e5160. doi: 10.1002/nbm.5160. Epub 2024 Apr 22.

Differentiation and characterization of healthy versus pathological tau using 
chemical exchange saturation transfer.

Yu FF(1)(2), Rathnakar J(2), Ryder B(3), Hitt B(3)(4)(5), Kashmer OM(3), Sherry 
AD(1)(2)(6), Vinogradov E(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, Texas, USA.
(2)Advanced Imaging Research Center, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.
(3)Center for Alzheimer's and Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, Texas, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, UCI Medical Center, Orange, California, USA.
(6)Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, University of Texas at Dallas, 
Dallas, Texas, USA.

Neurofibrillary tangles of tau constitute one of the key biological hallmarks of 
Alzheimer's disease. Currently, the assessment of regional tau accumulation 
requires intravenous administration of radioactive tracers for PET imaging. A 
noninvasive MRI-based solution would have significant clinical implications. 
Herein, we utilized an MRI technique known as chemical exchange saturation 
transfer (CEST) to determine the imaging signature of tau in both its monomeric 
and pathologic fibrillated conformations. Three sets of purified recombinant 
full-length (4R) tau protein were prepared for collection of CEST spectra using 
a 9.4 T NMR spectrometer at varying temperatures (25, 37, and 42 °C) and RF 
intensities (0.7, 1.0, 1.5, and 2.2 μT). Monomeric and fibrillated tau were 
readily distinguished based on their Z-spectrum profiles. Fibrillated tau 
demonstrated a less prominent peak at 3.5 ppm with additional peaks near 0.5 and 
1.5 ppm. No significant differences were identified between fibrillated tau 
prepared using heparin versus seed-competent tau. In conclusion, monomeric and 
fibrillated tau can be readily detected and distinguished based on their 
CEST-derived Z-spectra, pointing to the potential utility of CEST-MRI as a 
noninvasive biomarker of regional pathologic tau accumulation in the brain. 
Further testing and validation in vitro and in vivo will be necessary before 
this can be applied clinically.

© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/nbm.5160
PMID: 38646677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Nature. 1994 Jun 9;369(6480):488-91. doi: 10.1038/369488a0.

Altered microtubule organization in small-calibre axons of mice lacking tau 
protein.

Harada A(1), Oguchi K, Okabe S, Kuno J, Terada S, Ohshima T, Sato-Yoshitake R, 
Takei Y, Noda T, Hirokawa N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, School of Medicine, University of 
Tokyo, Japan.

The tau gene encodes a protein (Tau) that is a major neuronal 
microtubule-associated protein localized mostly in axons. It has 
microtubule-binding and tubulin-polymerizing activity in vitro and is thought to 
make short crossbridges between axonal microtubules. Further, tau-transfected 
non-neuronal cells extend long axon-like processes in which microtubule bundles 
resembling those in axons are formed. In contrast, tau antisense 
oligonucleotides selectively suppress axonal elongation in cultured neurons. 
Thus tau is thought to be essential for neuronal cell morphogenesis, especially 
axonal elongation and maintenance. To test this hypothesis, we used gene 
targeting to produce mice lacking the tau gene. We show that the nervous system 
of tau-deficient mice appears to be normal immunohistologically. Furthermore, 
axonal elongation is not affected in cultured neurons. But in some small-calibre 
axons, microtubule stability is decreased and microtubule organization is 
significantly changed. We observed an increase in microtubule-associated protein 
1A which may compensate for the functions of tau in large-calibre axons. Our 
results argue against the suggested role of tau in axonal elongation but confirm 
that it is crucial in the stabilization and organization of axonal microtubules 
in a certain type of axon.

DOI: 10.1038/369488a0
PMID: 8202139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2005 Jan 3;1739(2-3):331-54. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbadis.2004.06.018.

Tau alteration and neuronal degeneration in tauopathies: mechanisms and models.

Brandt R(1), Hundelt M, Shahani N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology, University of Osnabrück, Barbarastrasse 11, 
D-49076 Osnabrück, Germany. Brandt@biologie.uni-osnabrueck.de

Tau becomes characteristically altered both functionally and structurally in 
several neurodegenerative diseases now collectively called tauopathies. Although 
increasing evidence supports that alterations of tau may directly cause neuronal 
degeneration and cell death, the mechanisms, which render tau to become a toxic 
agent are still unclear. In addition, it is obscure, whether neurodegeneration 
in tauopathies occurs via a common mechanism or specific differences exist. The 
aim of this review is to provide an overview about the different experimental 
models that currently exist, how they are used to determine the role of tau 
during degeneration and what has been learnt from them concerning the 
mechanistic role of tau in the disease process. The review begins with a 
discussion about similarities and differences in tau alteration in paradigmatic 
tauopathies such as frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to 
chromosome 17 (FTDP-17) and Alzheimer's disease (AD). The second part 
concentrates on major experimental models that have been used to address the 
mechanistic role of tau during degeneration. This will include a discussion of 
cell-free assays, culture models using cell lines or dissociated neurons, and 
animal models. How these models aid to understand (i) alterations in the 
function of tau as a microtubule-associated protein (MAP), (ii) direct 
cytotoxicity of altered tau protein, and (iii) the potential role of tau 
aggregation in neurodegenerative processes will be the central theme of this 
part. The review ends with concluding remarks about a general mechanistic model 
of the role of tau alteration and neuronal degeneration in tauopathies and 
future perspectives.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2004.06.018
PMID: 15615650 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Biochem Soc Trans. 2012 Aug;40(4):681-6. doi: 10.1042/BST20120015.

The self-perpetuating tau truncation circle.

Zilka N(1), Kovacech B, Barath P, Kontsekova E, Novák M.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuroimmunology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava 84510, 
Slovak Republic.

Pathological truncations of human brain proteins represent the common feature of 
many neurodegenerative disorders including AD (Alzheimer's disease), Parkinson's 
disease and Huntington's disease. Protein truncations significantly change the 
structure and function of these proteins and thus can engender their 
pathological metamorphosis. We have shown previously that truncated forms of tau 
protein are contained in the core of the paired helical filaments that represent 
the main constituent of neurofibrillary pathology. Recently, we have identified 
truncated tau species of a different molecular signature. We have found that tau 
truncation is not produced by a random process, but rather by highly specific 
proteolytic cleavage and/or non-enzymatic fragmentation. In order to 
characterize the pathophysiology of AD-specific truncated tau species, we have 
used a transgenic rat model for AD expressing human truncated tau. Expression of 
the tau protein induces the formation of novel truncated tau species that 
originate from both transgenic human tau and endogenous rat tau proteins. 
Moreover, these truncated tau proteins are found exclusively in the misfolded 
fraction of tau, suggesting that they actively participate in the tau misfolding 
process. These findings corroborate further the idea that the appearance of 
truncated tau species starts a self-perpetuating cycle of further tau protein 
truncation leading to and accelerating tau misfolding and formation of 
neurofibrillary pathology.

DOI: 10.1042/BST20120015
PMID: 22817716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]